12.7 Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Define diffusion, osmosis, dialysis, and active transport.   
• Calculate diffusion rates.

Diffusion

There is something fishy about the ice cube from your freezer—how did it pick up those food odors? How does soaking a sprained ankle in Epsom salt reduce swelling? The answer to these questions are related to atomic and molecular transport phenomena—another mode of fluid motion. Atoms and molecules are in constant motion at any temperature. In fluids they move about randomly even in the absence of macroscopic flow. This motion is called a random walk and is illustrated in Figure 12.20. Diffusion is the movement of substances due to random thermal molecular motion. Fluids, like fish fumes or odors entering ice cubes, can even diffuse through solids.

Diffusion is a slow process over macroscopic distances. The densities of common materials are great enough that molecules cannot travel very far before having a collision that can scatter them in any direction, including straight backward. It can be shown that the average distance  that a molecule travels is proportional to the square root of time:

where  stands for the root-mean-square distance and is the statistical average for the process. The quantity  is the diffusion constant for the particular molecule in a specific medium. Table 12.2 lists representative values of  for various substances, in units of  .

Note that  gets progressively smaller for more massive molecules. This decrease is because the average molecular speed at a given temperature is inversely proportional to molecular mass. Thus the more massive molecules diffuse more slowly. Another interesting point is that  for oxygen in air is much greater than  for oxygen in water. In water, an oxygen molecule makes many more collisions in its random walk and is slowed considerably. In water, an oxygen molecule moves only about  in 1 s. (Each molecule actually collides about  times per second!). Finally, note that diffusion constants increase with temperature, because average molecular speed increases with temperature. This is because the average kinetic energy of molecules,  , is proportional to absolute temperature.

EXAMPLE 12.11

Calculating Diffusion: How Long Does Glucose Diffusion Take?

Calculate the average time it takes a glucose molecule to move 1.0 cm in water.

Strategy

We can use  , the expression for the average distance moved in time  , and solve it for . All other quantities are known.

Solution

Solving for  and substituting known values yields

Discussion

This is a remarkably long time for glucose to move a mere centimeter! For this reason, we stir sugar into water rather than waiting for it to diffuse.

Because diffusion is typically very slow, its most important effects occur over small distances. For example, the cornea of the eye gets most of its oxygen by diffusion through the thin tear layer covering it.

The Rate and Direction of Diffusion

If you very carefully place a drop of food coloring in a still glass of water, it will slowly diffuse into the colorless surroundings until its concentration is the same everywhere. This type of diffusion is called free diffusion, because there are no barriers inhibiting it. Let us examine its direction and rate. Molecular motion is random in direction, and so simple chance dictates that more molecules will move out of a region of high concentration than into it. The net rate of diffusion is higher initially than after the process is partially completed. (See Figure 12.21.)

The net rate of diffusion is proportional to the concentration difference. Many more molecules will leave a region of high concentration than will enter it from a region of low concentration. In fact, if the concentrations were the same, there would be nonet movement. The net rate of diffusion is also proportional to the diffusion constant  , which is determined experimentally. The farther a molecule can diffuse in a given time, the more likely it is to leave the region of high concentration. Many of the factors that affect the rate are hidden in the diffusion constant  . For example, temperature and cohesive and adhesive forces all affect values of  .

Diffusion is the dominant mechanism by which the exchange of nutrients and waste products occur between the blood and tissue, and between air and blood in the lungs. In the evolutionary process, as organisms became larger, they needed quicker methods of transportation than net diffusion, because of the larger distances involved in the transport, leading to the development of circulatory systems. Less sophisticated, single-celled organisms still rely totally on diffusion for the removal of waste products and the uptake of nutrients.

Osmosis and Dialysis—Diffusion across Membranes

Some of the most interesting examples of diffusion occur through barriers that affect the rates of diffusion. For example, when you soak a swollen ankle in Epsom salt, water diffuses through your skin. Many substances regularly move through cell membranes; oxygen moves in, carbon dioxide moves out, nutrients go in, and wastes go out, for example. Because membranes are thin structures (typically  to  m across) diffusion rates through them can be high. Diffusion through membranes is an important method of transport.

Membranes are generally selectively permeable, or semipermeable. (See Figure 12.22.) One type of semipermeable membrane has small pores that allow only small molecules to pass through. In other types of membranes, the molecules may actually dissolve in the membrane or react with molecules in the membrane while moving across. Membrane function, in fact, is the subject of much current research, involving not only physiology but also chemistry and physics.

Osmosis is the transport of water through a semipermeable membrane from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration. Osmosis is driven by the imbalance in water concentration. For example, water is more concentrated in your body than in Epsom salt. When you soak a swollen ankle in Epsom salt, the water moves out of your body into the lower-concentration region in the salt. Similarly, dialysis is the transport of any other molecule through a semipermeable membrane due to its concentration difference. Both osmosis and dialysis are used by the kidneys to cleanse the blood.

Osmosis can create a substantial pressure. Consider what happens if osmosis continues for some time, as illustrated in Figure 12.23. Water moves by osmosis from the left into the region on the right, where it is less concentrated, causing the solution on the right to rise. This movement will continue until the pressure created by the extra height of fluid on the right is large enough to stop further osmosis. This pressure is called a back pres ure. The back pressure  that stops osmosis is also called the relative osmotic pressure if neither solution is pure water, and it is called the osmotic pressure if one solution is pure water. Osmotic pressure can be large, depending on the size of the concentration difference. For example, if pure water and sea water are separated by a semipermeable membrane that passes no salt, osmotic pressure will be 25.9 atm. This value means that water will diffuse through the membrane until the salt water surface rises  above the pure-water surface! One example of pressure created by osmosis is turgor in plants (many wilt when too dry). Turgor describes the condition of a plant in which the fluid in a cell exerts a pressure against the cell wall. This pressure gives the plant support. Dialysis can similarly cause substantial pressures.

Reverse osmosis and reverse dialysis (also called filtration) are processes that occur when back pressure is sufficient to reverse the normal direction of substances through membranes. Back pressure can be created naturally as on the right side of Figure 12.23. (A piston can also create this pressure.) Reverse osmosis can be used to desalinate water by simply forcing it through a membrane that will not pass salt. Similarly, reverse dialysis can be used to filter out any substance that a given membrane will not pass.

One further example of the movement of substances through membranes deserves mention. We sometimes find that substances pass in the direction opposite to what we expect. Cypress tree roots, for example, extract pure water from salt water, although osmosis would move it in the opposite direction. This is not reverse osmosis, because there is no back pressure to cause it. What is happening is called active transport, a process in which a living membrane expends energy to move substances across it. Many living membranes move water and other substances by active transport. The kidneys, for example, not only use osmosis and dialysis—they also employ significant active transport to move substances into and out of blood. In fact, it is estimated that at least  of the body’s energy is expended on active transport of substances at the cellular level. The study of active transport carries us into the realms of microbiology, biophysics, and biochemistry and it is a fascinating application of the laws of nature to living structures.

Glossary

active transport the process in which a living membrane expends energy to move substances across   
Bernoulli’s equation the equation resulting from applying conservation of energy to an incompressible frictionless fluid:  constant , through the fluid   
Bernoulli’s principle Bernoulli’s equation applied at constant depth:    
dialysis the transport of any molecule other than water through a semipermeable membrane from a region of high concentration to one of low concentration   
diffusion the movement of substances due to random thermal molecular motion   
flow rate abbreviated  it is the volume Vthat flows past a particular point during a time  , or    
fluid dynamics the physics of fluids in motion   
laminar a type of fluid flow in which layers do not mix   
liter a unit of volume, equal to    
osmosis the transport of water through a semipermeable membrane from a region of high concentration to one of low concentration   
osmotic pressure the back pressure which stops the osmotic process if one solution is pure water   
Poiseuille’s law the rate of laminar flow of an incompressible fluid in a tube:    
Poiseuille’s law for resistance the resistance to laminar flow of an incompressible fluid in a tube:     
relative osmotic pressure the back pressure which stops the osmotic process if neither solution is pure water   
reverse dialysis the process that occurs when back pressure is sufficient to reverse the normal direction of dialysis through membranes   
reverse osmosis the process that occurs when back pressure is sufficient to reverse the normal direction of osmosis through membranes   
Reynolds number a dimensionless parameter that can reveal whether a particular flow is laminar or turbulent   
semipermeable a type of membrane that allows only certain small molecules to pass through   
terminal speed the speed at which the viscous drag of an object falling in a viscous fluid is equal to the other forces acting on the object (such as gravity), so that the acceleration of the object is zero   
turbulence fluid flow in which layers mix together via eddies and swirls   
viscosity the friction in a fluid, defined in terms of the friction between layers   
viscous drag a resistance force exerted on a moving object, with a nontrivial dependence on velocity

12.1 Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity

Section Summary

• Flow rate  is defined to be the volume  flowing past a point in time  , or  where  is volume and  is time.   
• The SI unit of volume is  .   
• Another common unit is the liter (L), which is  . Flow rate and velocity are related by  where  is the cross-sectional area of the flow and  is its average velocity.   
• For incompressible fluids, flow rate at various points is constant. That is, 

12.2 Bernoulli’s Equation

• Bernoulli’s equation states that the sum on each side of the following equation is constant, or the same at any two points in an incompressible frictionless fluid:

   
Bernoulli’s principle is Bernoulli’s equation applied to situations in which depth is constant. The terms involving depth (or height  ) subtract out, yielding    
• Bernoulli’s principle has many applications,   
including entrainment, wings and sails, and   
velocity measurement.

12.3 The Most General Applications of Bernoulli’s Equation

• Power in fluid flow is given by the equation  where the first term is power associated with pressure, the second is power associated with velocity, and the third is power associated with height.

12.4 Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law

• Laminar flow is characterized by smooth flow of

the fluid in layers that do not mix.   
• Turbulence is characterized by eddies and swirls that mix layers of fluid together.   
• Fluid viscosity  is due to friction within a fluid. Representative values are given in Table 12.1. Viscosity has units of  or  . Flow is proportional to pressure difference and inversely proportional to resistance:  For laminar flow in a tube, Poiseuille’s law for resistance states that    
• Poiseuille’s law for flow in a tube is    
• The pressure drop caused by flow and resistance is given by 

12.5 The Onset of Turbulence

• The Reynolds number  can reveal whether flow is laminar or turbulent. It is    
• For  below about 2000, flow is laminar. For  above about 3000, flow is turbulent. For values of  between 2000 and 3000, it may be either or both.

12.6 Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid

• When an object moves in a fluid, there is a different form of the Reynolds number  which indicates whether flow is laminar or turbulent.   
• For  less than about one, flow is laminar. For  greater than  , flow is entirely turbulent.

12.7 Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes

• Diffusion is the movement of substances due to random thermal molecular motion.   
• The average distance  a molecule travels by diffusion in a given amount of time is given by  where  is the diffusion constant, representative values of which are found in Table 12.2.   
• Osmosis is the transport of water through a semipermeable membrane from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration.   
• Dialysis is the transport of any other molecule through a semipermeable membrane due to its concentration difference.   
• Both processes can be reversed by back pressure.   
• Active transport is a process in which a living membrane expends energy to move substances across it.

Conceptual Questions

12.1 Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity

1. What is the difference between flow rate and fluid velocity? How are they related?   
2. Many figures in the text show streamlines. Explain why fluid velocity is greatest where streamlines are closest together. (Hint: Consider the relationship between fluid velocity and the cross-sectional area through which it flows.)   
3. Identify some substances that are incompressible and some that are not.

12.2 Bernoulli’s Equation

4. You can squirt water a considerably greater distance by placing your thumb over the end of a garden hose and then releasing, than by leaving it completely uncovered. Explain how this works.

5. Water is shot nearly vertically upward in a decorative fountain and the stream is observed to broaden as it rises. Conversely, a stream of water falling straight down from a faucet narrows. Explain why, and discuss whether surface tension enhances or reduces the effect in each case.   
6. Look back to Figure 12.4. Answer the following two questions. Why is  less than atmospheric? Why is  greater than    
7. Give an example of entrainment not mentioned in the text.   
8. Many entrainment devices have a constriction, called a Venturi, such as shown in Figure 12.24. How does this bolster entrainment?   
9. Some chimney pipes have a T-shape, with a crosspiece on top that helps draw up gases whenever there is even a slight breeze. Explain how this works in terms of Bernoulli’s principle.   
10. Is there a limit to the height to which an entrainment device can raise a fluid? Explain your answer.   
11. Why is it preferable for airplanes to take off into the wind rather than with the wind?   
12. Roofs are sometimes pushed off vertically during a tropical cyclone, and buildings sometimes explode outward when hit by a tornado. Use Bernoulli’s principle to explain these phenomena.   
13. Why does a sailboat need a keel?   
14. It is dangerous to stand close to railroad tracks when a rapidly moving commuter train passes. Explain why atmospheric pressure would push you toward the moving train.   
15. Water pressure inside a hose nozzle can be less than atmospheric pressure due to the Bernoulli effect. Explain in terms of energy how the water can emerge from the nozzle against the opposing atmospheric pressure.

16. A perfume bottle or atomizer sprays a fluid that is in the bottle. (Figure 12.25.) How does the fluid rise up in the vertical tube in the bottle?

17. If you lower the window on a car while moving, an empty plastic bag can sometimes fly out the window. Why does this happen?

12.3 The Most General Applications of Bernoulli’s Equation

18. Based on Bernoulli’s equation, what are three forms of energy in a fluid? (Note that these forms are conservative, unlike heat transfer and other dissipative forms not included in Bernoulli’s equation.)   
19. Water that has emerged from a hose into the atmosphere has a gauge pressure of zero. Why? When you put your hand in front of the emerging stream you feel a force, yet the water’s gauge pressure is zero. Explain where the force comes from in terms of energy.

20. The old rubber boot shown in Figure 12.26 has two leaks. To what maximum height can the water squirt from Leak 1? How does the velocity of water emerging from Leak 2 differ from that of leak 1? Explain your responses in terms of energy.

21. Water pressure inside a hose nozzle can be less than atmospheric pressure due to the Bernoulli effect. Explain in terms of energy how the water can emerge from the nozzle against the opposing atmospheric pressure.

12.4 Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law

22. Explain why the viscosity of a liquid decreases with temperature—that is, how might increased temperature reduce the effects of cohesive forces in a liquid? Also explain why the viscosity of a gas increases with temperature—that is, how does increased gas temperature create more collisions between atoms and molecules?   
23. When paddling a canoe upstream, it is wisest to travel as near to the shore as possible. When canoeing downstream, it may be best to stay near the middle. Explain why.   
24. Why does flow decrease in your shower when someone flushes the toilet?

25. Plumbing usually includes air-filled tubes near water faucets, as shown in Figure 12.27. Explain why they are needed and how they work.

12.5 The Onset of Turbulence

26. Doppler ultrasound can be used to measure the speed of blood in the body. If there is a partial constriction of an artery, where would you expect blood speed to be greatest, at or nearby the constriction? What are the two distinct causes of higher resistance in the constriction?

27. Sink drains often have a device such as that shown in Figure 12.28 to help speed the flow of water. How does this work?

28. Some ceiling fans have decorative wicker reeds on their blades. Discuss whether these fans are as quiet and efficient as those with smooth blades.

12.6 Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid

29. What direction will a helium balloon move inside a car that is slowing down—toward the front or back? Explain your answer.

30. Will identical raindrops fall more rapidly in  air or  air, neglecting any differences in air density? Explain your answer.   
31. If you took two marbles of different sizes, what would you expect to observe about the relative magnitudes of their terminal velocities?

12.7 Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes

Problems & Exercises

12.1 Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity

1. What is the average flow rate in  of gasoline to the engine of a car traveling at  if it averages  /L?   
2. The heart of a resting adult pumps blood at a rate of  . (a) Convert this to  . (b) What is this rate in    
3. Blood is pumped from the heart at a rate of  min into the aorta (of radius  ). Determine the speed of blood through the aorta.   
4. Blood is flowing through an artery of radius  at a rate of  . Determine the flow rate and the volume that passes through the artery in a period of  .   
5. The Huka Falls on the Waikato River is one of New Zealand’s most visited natural tourist attractions (see Figure 12.29). On average the river has a flow rate of about  . At the gorge, the river narrows to  wide and averages  deep. (a) What is the average speed of the river in the gorge? (b) What is the average speed of the water in the river downstream of the falls when it widens to 60 m and its depth increases to an average of 

6. A major artery with a cross-sectional area of  branches into 18 smaller arteries, each with an average cross-sectional area of  . By what factor is the average velocity of the blood reduced when it passes into these branches?

32. Why would you expect the rate of diffusion to increase with temperature? Can you give an example, such as the fact that you can dissolve sugar more rapidly in hot water?   
33. How are osmosis and dialysis similar? How do they differ?   
7. (a) As blood passes through the capillary bed in an organ, the capillaries join to form venules (small veins). If the blood speed increases by a factor of 4.00 and the total cross-sectional area of the venules is  , what is the total crosssectional area of the capillaries feeding these venules? (b) How many capillaries are involved if their average diameter is    
8. The human circulation system has approximately  capillary vessels. Each vessel has a diameter of about  . Assuming cardiac output is  , determine the average velocity of blood flow through each capillary vessel.   
9. (a) Estimate the time it would take to fill a private swimming pool with a capacity of 80,000 L using a garden hose delivering  . (b) How long would it take to fill if you could divert a moderate size river, flowing at  , into it?   
10. The flow rate of blood through a  -m -radius capillary is  (a) What is the speed of the blood flow? (This small speed allows time for diffusion of materials to and from the blood.) (b) Assuming all the blood in the body passes through capillaries, how many of them must there be to carry a total flow of  (The large number obtained is an overestimate, but it is still reasonable.)   
11. (a) What is the fluid speed in a fire hose with a 9.00-cm diameter carrying  of water per second? (b) What is the flow rate in cubic meters per second? (c) Would your answers be different if salt water replaced the fresh water in the fire hose?   
12. The main uptake air duct of a forced air gas heater is  in diameter. What is the average speed of air in the duct if it carries a volume equal to that of the house’s interior every 15 min? The inside volume of the house is equivalent to a rectangular solid  wide by  long by  high.

13. Water is moving at a velocity of  through a hose with an internal diameter of  . (a) What is the flow rate in liters per second? (b) The fluid velocity in this hose’s nozzle is  . What is the nozzle’s inside diameter?

14. Prove that the speed of an incompressible fluid through a constriction, such as in a Venturi tube, increases by a factor equal to the square of the factor by which the diameter decreases. (The converse applies for flow out of a constriction into a larger-diameter region.)

15. Water emerges straight down from a faucet with a 1.80-cm diameter at a speed of  . (Because of the construction of the faucet, there is no variation in speed across the stream.) (a) What is the flow rate in  (b) What is the diameter of the stream  below the faucet? Neglect any effects due to surface tension.

16. Unreasonable Results A mountain stream is  wide and averages  in depth. During the spring runoff, the flow in the stream reaches  . (a) What is the average velocity of the stream under these conditions? (b) What is unreasonable about this velocity? (c) What is unreasonable or inconsistent about the premises?

12.2 Bernoulli’s Equation

17. Verify that pressure has units of energy per unit volume.

18. Suppose you have a wind speed gauge like the pitot tube shown in Example 12.2(b). By what factor must wind speed increase to double the value of  in the manometer? Is this independent of the moving fluid and the fluid in the manometer?   
19. If the pressure reading of your pitot tube is 15.0 mm  at a speed of  , what will it be at  at the same altitude?   
20. Calculate the maximum height to which water could be squirted with the hose in Example 12.2 example if it: (a) Emerges from the nozzle. (b) Emerges with the nozzle removed, assuming the same flow rate.   
21. Every few years, winds in Boulder, Colorado, attain sustained speeds of  (about  ) when the jet stream descends during early spring. Approximately what is the force due to the Bernoulli effect on a roof having an area of  Typical air density in Boulder is  , and the corresponding atmospheric pressure is  . (Bernoulli’s principle as stated in the text assumes laminar flow. Using the principle here produces only an approximate result, because there is significant turbulence.)   
22. (a) Calculate the approximate force on a square meter of sail, given the horizontal velocity of the wind is  parallel to its front surface and  along its back surface. Take the density of air to be  . (The calculation, based on Bernoulli’s principle, is approximate due to the effects of turbulence.) (b) Discuss whether this force is great enough to be effective for propelling a sailboat.   
23. (a) What is the pressure drop due to the Bernoulli effect as water goes into a 3.00-cm-diameter nozzle from a 9.00-cm-diameter fire hose while carrying a flow of  (b) To what maximum height above the nozzle can this water rise? (The actual height will be significantly smaller due to air resistance.)   
24. (a) Using Bernoulli’s equation, show that the measured fluid speed  for a pitot tube, like the one in Figure 12.7(b), is given by  where  is the height of the manometer fluid,  is the density of the manometer fluid,  is the density of the moving fluid, and  is the acceleration due to gravity. (Note that  is indeed proportional to the square root of  , as stated in the text.) (b) Calculate  for moving air if a mercury manometer’s  is  .   
12.3 The Most General Applications of

Bernoulli’s Equation

25. Hoover Dam on the Colorado River is the highest dam in the United States at  , with an output of 1300 MW. The dam generates electricity with water taken from a depth of  and an average flow rate of  . (a) Calculate the power in this flow. (b) What is the ratio of this power to the facility’s average of 680 MW?

26. A frequently quoted rule of thumb in aircraft design is that wings should produce about  of lift per square meter of wing. (The fact that a wing has a top and bottom surface does not double its area.) (a) At takeoff, an aircraft travels at  , so that the air speed relative to the bottom of the wing is  . Given the sea level density of air to be  , how fast must it move over the upper surface to create the ideal lift? (b) How fast must air move over the upper surface at a cruising speed of  and at an altitude where air density is one-fourth that at sea level? (Note that this is not all of the aircraft’s lift—some comes from the body of the plane, some from engine thrust, and so on. Furthermore, Bernoulli’s principle gives an approximate answer because flow over the wing creates turbulence.)

27. The left ventricle of a resting adult’s heart pumps blood at a flow rate of  , increasing its pressure by  , its speed from zero to  , and its height by  . (All numbers are averaged over the entire heartbeat.) Calculate the total power output of the left ventricle. Note that most of the power is used to increase blood pressure.

28. A sump pump (used to drain water from the basement of houses built below the water table) is draining a flooded basement at the rate of 0.750 L/s, with an output pressure of . (a) The water enters a hose with a 3.00-cm inside diameter and rises  above the pump. What is its pressure at this point? (b) The hose goes over the foundation wall, losing  in height, and widens to  in diameter. What is the pressure now? You may neglect frictional losses in both parts of the problem.

12.4 Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law

29. (a) Calculate the retarding force due to the viscosity of the air layer between a cart and a level air track given the following information—air temperature is  , the cart is moving at 0.400  , its surface area is  , and the thickness of the air layer is  . (b) What is the ratio of this force to the weight of the  cart?

30. What force is needed to pull one microscope slide over another at a speed of  , if there is a  -thick layer of  water between them and the contact area is 

31. A glucose solution being administered with an IV has a flow rate of  . What will the new flow rate be if the glucose is replaced by whole blood having the same density but a viscosity 2.50 times that of the glucose? All other factors remain constant.

32. The pressure drop along a length of artery is 100 Pa, the radius is  , and the flow is laminar. The average speed of the blood is  . (a) What is the net force on the blood in this section of artery? (b) What is the power expended maintaining the flow?

33. A small artery has a length of  and a radius of  . If the pressure drop across the artery is  , what is the flow rate through the artery? (Assume that the temperature is  .)

34. Fluid originally flows through a tube at a rate of  . To illustrate the sensitivity of flow rate to various factors, calculate the new flow rate for the following changes with all other factors remaining the same as in the original conditions. (a) Pressure difference increases by a factor of 1.50. (b) A new fluid with 3.00 times greater viscosity is substituted. (c) The tube is replaced by one having 4.00 times the length. (d) Another tube is used with a radius 0.100 times the original. (e) Yet another tube is substituted with a radius 0.100 times the original and half the length, andthe pressure difference is increased by a factor of 1.50.

35. The arterioles (small arteries) leading to an organ, constrict in order to decrease flow to the organ. To shut down an organ, blood flow is reduced naturally to  of its original value. By what factor did the radii of the arterioles constrict? Penguins do this when they stand on ice to reduce the blood flow to their feet.

36. Angioplasty is a technique in which arteries partially blocked with plaque are dilated to increase blood flow. By what factor must the radius of an artery be increased in order to increase blood flow by a factor of 10?

37. (a) Suppose a blood vessel’s radius is decreased to  of its original value by plaque deposits and the body compensates by increasing the pressure difference along the vessel to keep the flow rate constant. By what factor must the pressure difference increase? (b) If turbulence is created by the obstruction, what additional effect would it have on the flow rate?

38. A spherical particle falling at a terminal speed in a liquid must have the gravitational force balanced by the drag force and the buoyant force. The buoyant force is equal to the weight of the displaced fluid, while the drag force is assumed to be given by Stokes Law,  . Show that the terminal speed is given by where is the radius of the sphere,  is its density, and  is the density of the fluid and  the coefficient of viscosity.

39. Using the equation of the previous problem, find the viscosity of motor oil in which a steel ball of radius  falls with a terminal speed of 4.32  . The densities of the ball and the oil are 7.86 and  , respectively.

40. A skydiver will reach a terminal velocity when the air drag equals their weight. For a skydiver with high speed and a large body, turbulence is a factor. The drag force then is approximately proportional to the square of the velocity. Taking the drag force to be  and setting this equal to the person’s weight, find the terminal speed for a person falling “spread eagle.” Find both a formula and a number for  , with assumptions as to size.

41. A layer of oil  thick is placed between two microscope slides. Researchers find that a force of  is required to glide one over the other at a speed of  when their contact area is  . What is the oil’s viscosity? What type of oil might it be?

42. (a) Verify that a  decrease in laminar flow through a tube is caused by a  decrease in radius, assuming that all other factors remain constant, as stated in the text. (b) What increase in flow is obtained from a  increase in radius, again assuming all other factors remain constant?

43. Example 12.8 dealt with the flow of saline solution in an IV system. (a) Verify that a pressure of  is created at a depth of  in a saline solution, assuming its density to be that of sea water. (b) Calculate the new flow rate if the height of the saline solution is decreased to 1.50 m. (c) At what height would the direction of flow be reversed? (This reversal can be a problem when patients stand up.)

44. When physicians diagnose arterial blockages, they quote the reduction in flow rate. If the flow rate in an artery has been reduced to  of its normal value by a blood clot and the average pressure difference has increased by  , by what factor has the clot reduced the radius of the artery?

45. During a marathon race, a runner’s blood flow increases to 10.0 times her resting rate. Her blood’s viscosity has dropped to  of its normal value, and the blood pressure difference across the circulatory system has increased by  . By what factor has the average radii of her blood vessels increased?

46. Water supplied to a house by a water main has a pressure of  early on a summer day when neighborhood use is low. This pressure produces a flow of  through a garden hose. Later in the day, pressure at the exit of the water main and entrance to the house drops, and a flow of only  is obtained through the same hose. (a) What pressure is now being supplied to the house, assuming resistance is constant? (b) By what factor did the flow rate in the water main increase in order to cause this decrease in delivered pressure? The pressure at the entrance of the water main is , and the original flow rate was  (c) How many more users are there, assuming each would consume  in the morning?

47. An oil gusher shoots crude oil  into the air through a pipe with a  diameter. Neglecting air resistance but not the resistance of the pipe, and assuming laminar flow, calculate the gauge pressure at the entrance of the  -long vertical pipe. Take the density of the oil to be  and its viscosity to be  (or  ). Note that you must take into account the pressure due to the  column of oil in the pipe.

48. Concrete is pumped from a cement mixer to the place it is being laid, instead of being carried in wheelbarrows. The flow rate is  through a 50.0-m-long, 8.00-cm-diameter hose, and the pressure at the pump is  . (a) Calculate the resistance of the hose. (b) What is the viscosity of the concrete, assuming the flow is laminar? (c) How much power is being supplied, assuming the point of use is at the same level as the pump? You may neglect the power supplied to increase the concrete’s velocity.

49. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a coronary artery constricted by arteriosclerosis. Construct a problem in which you calculate the amount by which the diameter of the artery is decreased, based on an assessment of the decrease in flow rate.

50. Consider a river that spreads out in a delta region on its way to the sea. Construct a problem in which you calculate the average speed at which water moves in the delta region, based on the speed at which it was moving up river. Among the things to consider are the size and flow rate of the river before it spreads out and its size once it has spread out. You can construct the problem for the river spreading out into one large river or into multiple smaller rivers.

12.5 The Onset of Turbulence

51. Verify that the flow of oil is laminar (barely) for an oil gusher that shoots crude oil  into the air through a pipe with a  diameter. The vertical pipe is  long. Take the density of the oil to be  and its viscosity to be  (or  .

52. Show that the Reynolds number  is unitless by substituting units for all the quantities in its definition and cancelling.

53. Calculate the Reynolds numbers for the flow of water through (a) a nozzle with a radius of 0.250 cm and (b) a garden hose with a radius of 0.900 cm, when the nozzle is attached to the hose. The flow rate through hose and nozzle is  . Can the flow in either possibly be laminar?

54. A fire hose has an inside diameter of  . Suppose such a hose carries a flow of  starting at a gauge pressure of . The hose goes  up a ladder to a nozzle having an inside diameter of  . Calculate the Reynolds numbers for flow in the fire hose and nozzle to show that the flow in each must be turbulent.

55. Concrete is pumped from a cement mixer to the place it is being laid, instead of being carried in wheelbarrows. The flow rate is  through a  -long, 8.00-cm-diameter hose, and the pressure at the pump is  . Verify that the flow of concrete is laminar taking concrete’s viscosity to be 48.0  , and given its density is  .

56. At what flow rate might turbulence begin to develop in a water main with a  diameter? Assume a  temperature.

57. What is the greatest average speed of blood flow at  in an artery of radius  if the flow is to remain laminar? What is the corresponding flow rate? Take the density of blood to be  .

58. In Take-Home Experiment: Inhalation, we measured the average flow rate  of air traveling through the trachea during each inhalation. Now calculate the average air speed in meters per second through your trachea during each inhalation. The radius of the trachea in adult humans is approximately  . From the data above, calculate the Reynolds number for the air flow in the trachea during inhalation. Do you expect the air flow to be laminar or turbulent?

59. Gasoline is piped underground from refineries to major users. The flow rate is  (about 500 gal/min), the viscosity of gasoline is   , and its density is  . (a) What minimum diameter must the pipe have if the Reynolds number is to be less than 2000? (b) What pressure difference must be maintained along each kilometer of the pipe to maintain this flow rate?

60. Assuming that blood is an ideal fluid, calculate the critical flow rate at which turbulence is a certainty in the aorta. Take the diameter of the aorta to be  . (Turbulence will actually occur at lower average flow rates, because blood is not an ideal fluid. Furthermore, since blood flow pulses, turbulence may occur during only the highvelocity part of each heartbeat.)

61. Unreasonable Results A fairly large garden hose has an internal radius of  and a length of  . The nozzleless horizontal hose is attached to a faucet, and it delivers  . (a) What water pressure is supplied by the faucet? (b) What is unreasonable about this pressure? (c) What is unreasonable about the premise? (d) What is the Reynolds number for the given flow? (Take the viscosity of water as 

12.7 Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes

62. You can smell perfume very shortly after opening the bottle. To show that it is not reaching your nose by diffusion, calculate the average distance a perfume molecule moves in one second in air, given its diffusion constant  to be  .   
63. What is the ratio of the average distances that oxygen will diffuse in a given time in air and water? Why is this distance less in water (equivalently, why is  less in water)?   
64. Oxygen reaches the veinless cornea of the eye by diffusing through its tear layer, which is  thick. How long does it take the average oxygen molecule to do this?   
65. (a) Find the average time required for an oxygen molecule to diffuse through a 0.200-mm-thick tear layer on the cornea. (b) How much time is required to diffuse  of oxygen to the cornea if its surface area is 

66. Suppose hydrogen and oxygen are diffusing through air. A small amount of each is released simultaneously. How much time passes before the hydrogen is 1.00 s ahead of the oxygen? Such differences in arrival times are used as an analytical tool in gas chromatography.