8.2 Hybrid Atomic Orbitals

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain the concept of atomic orbital hybridization • Determine the hybrid orbitals associated with various molecular geometries

Thinking in terms of overlapping atomic orbitals is one way for us to explain how chemical bonds form in diatomic molecules. However, to understand how molecules with more than two atoms form stable bonds, we require a more detailed model. As an example, let us consider the water molecule, in which we have one oxygen atom bonding to two hydrogen atoms. Oxygen has the electron configuration  , with two unpaired electrons (one in each of the two  orbitals). Valence bond theory would predict that the two  bonds form from the overlap of these two  orbitals with the 1sorbitals of the hydrogen atoms. If this were the case, the bond angle would be  , as shown in Figure  , because  orbitals are perpendicular to each other. Experimental evidence shows that the bond angle is  , not  . The prediction of the valence bond theory model does not match the real-world observations of a water molecule; a different model is needed.

Quantum-mechanical calculations suggest why the observed bond angles in  differ from those predicted by the overlap of the 1sorbital of the hydrogen atoms with the  orbitals of the oxygen atom. The mathematical expression known as the wave function,  , contains information about each orbital and the wavelike properties of electrons in an isolated atom. When atoms are bound together in a molecule, the wave functions combine to produce new mathematical descriptions that have different shapes. This process of combining the wave functions for atomic orbitals is called hybridization and is mathematically accomplished by the linearcombinationofatomicorbitals, LCAO, (a technique that we will encounter again later). The new orbitals that result are called hybrid orbitals. The valence orbitals in an isolatedoxygen atom are a  orbital and three  orbitals. The valence orbitals in an oxygen atom in a water molecule differ; they consist of four equivalent hybrid orbitals that point approximately toward the corners of a tetrahedron (Figure 8.7). Consequently, the overlap of the O and H orbitals should result in a tetrahedral bond angle  . The observed angle of  is experimental evidence for which quantum-mechanical calculations give a useful explanation: Valence bond theory must include a hybridization component to give accurate predictions.

The following ideas are important in understanding hybridization:

1. Hybrid orbitals do not exist in isolated atoms. They are formed only in covalently bonded atoms.   
2. Hybrid orbitals have shapes and orientations that are very different from those of the atomic orbitals in isolated atoms.   
3. A set of hybrid orbitals is generated by combining atomic orbitals. The number of hybrid orbitals in a set is equal to the number of atomic orbitals that were combined to produce the set.   
4. All orbitals in a set of hybrid orbitals are equivalent in shape and energy.   
5. The type of hybrid orbitals formed in a bonded atom depends on its electron-pair geometry as predicted by the VSEPR theory.   
6. Hybrid orbitals overlap to form σ bonds. Unhybridized orbitals overlap to form π bonds.

In the following sections, we shall discuss the common types of hybrid orbitals.

 Hybridization

The beryllium atom in a gaseous  molecule is an example of a central atom with no lone pairs of electrons in a linear arrangement of three atoms. There are two regions of valence electron density in the  molecule that correspond to the two covalent  bonds. To accommodate these two electron domains, two of the Be atom’s four valence orbitals will mix to yield two hybrid orbitals. This hybridization process involves mixing of the valence  orbital with one of the valence  orbitals to yield two equivalent sphybrid orbitals that are oriented in a linear geometry (Figure 8.8). In this figure, the set of  orbitals appears similar in shape to the original  orbital, but there is an important difference. The number of atomic orbitals combined always equals the number of hybrid orbitals formed. The  orbital is one orbital that can hold up to two electrons. The  set is two equivalent orbitals that point  from each other. The two electrons that were originally in the  orbital are now distributed to the two  orbitals, which are half filled. In gaseous  , these half-filled hybrid orbitals will overlap with orbitals from the chlorine atoms to form two identical  bonds.

We illustrate the electronic differences in an isolated Be atom and in the bonded Be atom in the orbital energylevel diagram in Figure 8.9. These diagrams represent each orbital by a horizontal line (indicating its energy) and each electron by an arrow. Energy increases toward the top of the diagram. We use one upward arrow to indicate one electron in an orbital and two arrows (up and down) to indicate two electrons of opposite spin.

When atomic orbitals hybridize, the valence electrons occupy the newly created orbitals. The Be atom had two valence electrons, so each of the sporbitals gets one of these electrons. Each of these electrons pairs up with the unpaired electron on a chlorine atom when a hybrid orbital and a chlorine orbital overlap during the formation of the Be–Cl bonds.

Any central atom surrounded by just two regions of valence electron density in a molecule will exhibit sp hybridization. Other examples include the mercury atom in the linear  molecule, the zinc atom in  , which contains a linear  arrangement, and the carbon atoms in HCCH and  .

LINK TO LEARNING

Check out the University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh website (http://openstax.org/l/16hybridorbital) to learn about visualizing hybrid orbitals in three dimensions.

 Hybridization

The valence orbitals of a central atom surrounded by three regions of electron density consist of a set of three  hybrid orbitals and one unhybridized  orbital. This arrangement results from  hybridization, the mixing of one  orbital and two  orbitals to produce three identical hybrid orbitals oriented in a trigonal planar geometry (Figure 8.10).

Although quantum mechanics yields the “plump” orbital lobes as depicted in Figure 8.10, sometimes for clarity these orbitals are drawn thinner and without the minor lobes, as in Figure 8.11, to avoid obscuring other features of a given illustration. We will use these “thinner” representations whenever the true view is too crowded to easily visualize.

The observed structure of the borane molecule,  , suggests  hybridization for boron in this compound. The molecule is trigonal planar, and the boron atom is involved in three bonds to hydrogen atoms (Figure 8.12). We can illustrate the comparison of orbitals and electron distribution in an isolated boron atom and in the bonded atom in  as shown in the orbital energy level diagram in Figure 8.13. We redistribute the three valence electrons of the boron atom in the three  hybrid orbitals, and each boron electron pairs with a hydrogen electron when  bonds form.

Any central atom surrounded by three regions of electron density will exhibit  hybridization. This includes molecules with a lone pair on the central atom, such as ClNO (Figure 8.14), or molecules with two single bonds and a double bond connected to the central atom, as in formaldehyde,  , and ethene,  .

 Hybridization

The valence orbitals of an atom surrounded by a tetrahedral arrangement of bonding pairs and lone pairs consist of a set of four  hybrid orbitals. The hybrids result from the mixing of one  orbital and all three  orbitals that produces four identical  hybrid orbitals (Figure 8.15). Each of these hybrid orbitals points toward a different corner of a tetrahedron.

A molecule of methane,  , consists of a carbon atom surrounded by four hydrogen atoms at the corners of a tetrahedron. The carbon atom in methane exhibits  hybridization. We illustrate the orbitals and electron distribution in an isolated carbon atom and in the bonded atom in  in Figure 8.16. The four valence electrons of the carbon atom are distributed equally in the hybrid orbitals, and each carbon electron pairs with a hydrogen electron when the  bonds form.

in a molecule like  with four regions of electron density. This creates four equivalent  hybridized orbitals.   
Overlap of each of the hybrid orbitals with a hydrogen orbital creates a C–H σ bond.

In a methane molecule, the  orbital of each of the four hydrogen atoms overlaps with one of the four  orbitals of the carbon atom to form a sigma (σ) bond. This results in the formation of four strong, equivalent covalent bonds between the carbon atom and each of the hydrogen atoms to produce the methane molecule,  .

The structure of ethane,  , is similar to that of methane in that each carbon in ethane has four neighboring atoms arranged at the corners of a tetrahedron—three hydrogen atoms and one carbon atom (Figure 8.17). However, in ethane an  orbital of one carbon atom overlaps end to end with an  orbital of a second carbon atom to form a σ bond between the two carbon atoms. Each of the remaining  hybrid orbitals overlaps with an  orbital of a hydrogen atom to form carbon–hydrogen σ bonds. The structure and overall outline of the bonding orbitals of ethane are shown in Figure 8.17. The orientation of the two  groups is not fixed relative to each other. Experimental evidence shows that rotation around σ bonds occurs easily.

An  hybrid orbital can also hold a lone pair of electrons. For example, the nitrogen atom in ammonia is surrounded by three bonding pairs and a lone pair of electrons directed to the four corners of a tetrahedron. The nitrogen atom is  hybridized with one hybrid orbital occupied by the lone pair.

The molecular structure of water is consistent with a tetrahedral arrangement of two lone pairs and two bonding pairs of electrons. Thus we say that the oxygen atom is  hybridized, with two of the hybrid orbitals occupied by lone pairs and two by bonding pairs. Since lone pairs occupy more space than bonding pairs, structures that contain lone pairs have bond angles slightly distorted from the ideal. Perfect tetrahedra have angles of  , but the observed angles in ammonia  and water  are slightly smaller. Other examples of  hybridization include  ,  , and  .

 and  Hybridization

To describe the five bonding orbitals in a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement, we must use five of the valence shell atomic orbitals (the  orbital, the three  orbitals, and one of the  orbitals), which gives five  hybrid orbitals. With an octahedral arrangement of six hybrid orbitals, we must use six valence shell atomic orbitals (the  orbital, the three  orbitals, and two of the  orbitals in its valence shell), which gives six  hybrid orbitals. These hybridizations are only possible for atoms that have  orbitals in their valence subshells (that is, not those in the first or second period).

In a molecule of phosphorus pentachloride,  , there are five P–Cl bonds (thus five pairs of valence electrons around the phosphorus atom) directed toward the corners of a trigonal bipyramid. We use the  orbital, the three  orbitals, and one of the  orbitals to form the set of five  hybrid orbitals (Figure 8.19) that are involved in the  bonds. Other atoms that exhibit  hybridization include the sulfur atom in  and the chlorine atoms in  and in  (The electrons on fluorine atoms are omitted for clarity.)

The sulfur atom in sulfur hexafluoride,  , exhibits  hybridization. A molecule of sulfur hexafluoride has six bonding pairs of electrons connecting six fluorine atoms to a single sulfur atom. There are no lone pairs of electrons on the central atom. To bond six fluorine atoms, the  orbital, the three  orbitals, and two of the  orbitals form six equivalent  hybrid orbitals, each directed toward a different corner of an octahedron. Other atoms that exhibit  hybridization include the phosphorus atom in  the iodine atom in the interhalogens   ,   and the xenon atom in  .

Assignment of Hybrid Orbitals to Central Atoms

The hybridization of an atom is determined based on the number of regions of electron density that surround it. The geometrical arrangements characteristic of the various sets of hybrid orbitals are shown in Figure 8.21. These arrangements are identical to those of the electron-pair geometries predicted by VSEPR theory. VSEPR theory predicts the shapes of molecules, and hybrid orbital theory provides an explanation for how those shapes are formed. To find the hybridization of a central atom, we can use the following guidelines:

1. Determine the Lewis structure of the molecule.   
2. Determine the number of regions of electron density around an atom using VSEPR theory, in which single bonds, multiple bonds, radicals, and lone pairs each count as one region.   
3. Assign the set of hybridized orbitals from Figure 8.21 that corresponds to this geometry.

It is important to remember that hybridization was devised to rationalize experimentally observed molecular geometries. The model works well for molecules containing small central atoms, in which the valence electron pairs are close together in space. However, for larger central atoms, the valence-shell electron pairs are farther from the nucleus, and there are fewer repulsions. Their compounds exhibit structures that are often not consistent with VSEPR theory, and hybridized orbitals are not necessary to explain the observed data. For example, we have discussed the  bond angle in  ,  , which is more consistent with  hybrid orbitals  on the central atom than with  orbitals  . Sulfur is in the same group as oxygen, and  has a similar Lewis structure. However, it has a much smaller bond angle  , which indicates much less hybridization on sulfur than oxygen. Continuing down the group, tellurium is even larger than sulfur, and for  , the observed bond angle  is consistent with overlap of the  orbitals, without invoking hybridization. We invoke hybridization where it is necessary to explain the observed structures.

EXAMPLE 8.2

Assigning Hybridization

Ammonium sulfate is important as a fertilizer. What is the hybridization of the sulfur atom in the sulfate ion, 

Solution

The Lewis structure of sulfate shows there are four regions of electron density. The hybridization is  .

Check Your Learning

What is the hybridization of the selenium atom in  ?

Answer:

The selenium atom is  hybridized.

EXAMPLE 8.3

Assigning Hybridization

Urea,  , is sometimes used as a source of nitrogen in fertilizers. What is the hybridization of the carbon atom in urea?

Solution

The Lewis structure of urea is

The carbon atom is surrounded by three regions of electron density, positioned in a trigonal planar arrangement. The hybridization in a trigonal planar electron pair geometry is  (Figure 8.21), which is the hybridization of the carbon atom in urea.

Check Your Learning

Acetic acid,  , is the molecule that gives vinegar its odor and sour taste. What is the hybridization of the two carbon atoms in acetic acid?

Answer:  ,  ; C(O)OH, sp2