21.3 Radioactive Decay

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Recognize common modes of radioactive decay   
• Identify common particles and energies involved in nuclear decay reactions   
• Write and balance nuclear decay equations   
Calculate kinetic parameters for decay processes, including half-life   
Describe common radiometric dating techniques

Following the somewhat serendipitous discovery of radioactivity by Becquerel, many prominent scientists began to investigate this new, intriguing phenomenon. Among them were Marie Curie (the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, and the only person to win two Nobel Prizes in different sciences—chemistry and physics), who was the first to coin the term “radioactivity,” and Ernest Rutherford (of gold foil experiment fame), who investigated and named three of the most common types of radiation. During the beginning of the twentieth century, many radioactive substances were discovered, the properties of radiation were investigated and quantified, and a solid understanding of radiation and nuclear decay was developed.

The spontaneous change of an unstable nuclide into another is radioactive decay. The unstable nuclide is called the parent nuclide; the nuclide that results from the decay is known as the daughter nuclide. The daughter nuclide may be stable, or it may decay itself. The radiation produced during radioactive decay is such that the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than the parent nuclide, so the location of a nuclide relative to the band of stability can serve as a guide to the kind of decay it will undergo (Figure 21.5).

LINK TO LEARNING

Although the radioactive decay of a nucleus is too small to see with the naked eye, we can indirectly view radioactive decay in an environment called a cloud chamber. Click here (http://openstax.org/l/16cloudchamb) to learn about cloud chambers and to view an interesting Cloud Chamber Demonstration from the Jefferson Lab.

Types of Radioactive Decay

Ernest Rutherford’s experiments involving the interaction of radiation with a magnetic or electric field (Figure 21.6) helped him determine that one type of radiation consisted of positively charged and relatively massive  particles; a second type was made up of negatively charged and much less massive  particles; and a third was uncharged electromagnetic waves, γ rays. We now know that  particles are high-energy helium nuclei,  particles are high-energy electrons, and γ radiation compose high-energy electromagnetic radiation. We classify different types of radioactive decay by the radiation produced.

Alpha  decay is the emission of an  particle from the nucleus. For example, polonium-210 undergoes α decay:

Alpha decay occurs primarily in heavy nuclei  ,  ). Because the loss of an  particle gives a daughter nuclide with a mass number four units smaller and an atomic number two units smaller than those of the parent nuclide, the daughter nuclide has a larger n:p ratio than the parent nuclide. If the parent nuclide undergoing  decay lies below the band of stability (refer to Figure 21.2), the daughter nuclide will lie closer to the band.

Beta (β) decay is the emission of an electron from a nucleus. Iodine-131 is an example of a nuclide that undergoes  decay:

Beta decay, which can be thought of as the conversion of a neutron into a proton and a  particle, is observed in nuclides with a large n:p ratio. The beta particle (electron) emitted is from the atomic nucleus and is not one of the electrons surrounding the nucleus. Such nuclei lie above the band of stability. Emission of an electron does not change the mass number of the nuclide but does increase the number of its protons and decrease the number of its neutrons. Consequently, the n:p ratio is decreased, and the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than did the parent nuclide.

Gamma emission (γ emission) is observed when a nuclide is formed in an excited state and then decays to its ground state with the emission of a γ ray, a quantum of high-energy electromagnetic radiation. The presence of a nucleus in an excited state is often indicated by an asterisk  . Cobalt-60 emits  radiation and is used in many applications including cancer treatment:

There is no change in mass number or atomic number during the emission of a  ray unless the  emission accompanies one of the other modes of decay.

Positron emission  decay) is the emission of a positron from the nucleus. Oxygen-15 is an example of a nuclide that undergoes positron emission:

Positron emission is observed for nuclides in which the n:p ratio is low. These nuclides lie below the band of stability. Positron decay is the conversion of a proton into a neutron with the emission of a positron. The n:p ratio increases, and the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than did the parent nuclide.

Electron capture occurs when one of the inner electrons in an atom is captured by the atom’s nucleus. For example, potassium-40 undergoes electron capture:

Electron capture occurs when an inner shell electron combines with a proton and is converted into a neutron. The loss of an inner shell electron leaves a vacancy that will be filled by one of the outer electrons. As the outer electron drops into the vacancy, it will emit energy. In most cases, the energy emitted will be in the form of an X-ray. Like positron emission, electron capture occurs for “proton-rich” nuclei that lie below the band of stability. Electron capture has the same effect on the nucleus as does positron emission: The atomic number is decreased by one and the mass number does not change. This increases the n:p ratio, and the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than did the parent nuclide. Whether electron capture or positron emission occurs is difficult to predict. The choice is primarily due to kinetic factors, with the one requiring the smaller activation energy being the one more likely to occur.

Chemistry in Everyday Life

PET Scan

Positron emission tomography (PET) scans use radiation to diagnose and track health conditions and monitor medical treatments by revealing how parts of a patient’s body function (Figure 21.8). To perform a PET scan, a positron-emitting radioisotope is produced in a cyclotron and then attached to a substance that is used by the part of the body being investigated. This “tagged” compound, or radiotracer, is then put into the patient (injected via IV or breathed in as a gas), and how it is used by the tissue reveals how that organ or other area of the body functions.

For example, F-18 is produced by proton bombardment of  and incorporated into a glucose analog called fludeoxyglucose (FDG). How FDG is used by the body provides critical diagnostic information; for example, since cancers use glucose differently than normal tissues, FDG can reveal cancers. The  emits positrons that interact with nearby electrons, producing a burst of gamma radiation. This energy is detected by the scanner and converted into a detailed, three-dimensional, color image that shows how that part of the patient’s body functions. Different levels of gamma radiation produce different amounts of brightness and colors in the image, which can then be interpreted by a radiologist to reveal what is going on. PET scans can detect heart damage and heart disease, help diagnose Alzheimer’s disease, indicate the part of a brain that is affected by epilepsy, reveal cancer, show what stage it is, and how much it has spread, and whether treatments are effective. Unlike magnetic resonance imaging and Xrays, which only show how something looks, the big advantage of PET scans is that they show how something functions. PET scans are now usually performed in conjunction with a computed tomography scan.

Radioactive Decay Series

The naturally occurring radioactive isotopes of the heaviest elements fall into chains of successive disintegrations, or decays, and all the species in one chain constitute a radioactive family, or radioactive decay series. Three of these series include most of the naturally radioactive elements of the periodic table. They are the uranium series, the actinide series, and the thorium series. The neptunium series is a fourth series, which is no longer significant on the earth because of the short half-lives of the species involved. Each series is characterized by a parent (first member) that has a long half-life and a series of daughter nuclides that ultimately lead to a stable end-product—that is, a nuclide on the band of stability (Figure 21.9). In all three series, the end-product is a stable isotope of lead. The neptunium series, previously thought to terminate with bismuth-209, terminates with thallium-205.

Radioactive Half-Lives

Radioactive decay follows first-order kinetics. Since first-order reactions have already been covered in detail in the kinetics chapter, we will now apply those concepts to nuclear decay reactions. Each radioactive nuclide has a characteristic, constant half-life  , the time required for half of the atoms in a sample to decay. An isotope’s half-life allows us to determine how long a sample of a useful isotope will be available, and how long a sample of an undesirable or dangerous isotope must be stored before it decays to a low-enough radiation level that is no longer a problem.

For example, cobalt-60, an isotope that emits gamma rays used to treat cancer, has a half-life of 5.27 years (Figure 21.10). In a given cobalt-60 source, since half of the  nuclei decay every 5.27 years, both the amount of material and the intensity of the radiation emitted is cut in half every 5.27 years. (Note that for a given substance, the intensity of radiation that it produces is directly proportional to the rate of decay of the substance and the amount of the substance.) This is as expected for a process following first-order kinetics. Thus, a cobalt-60 source that is used for cancer treatment must be replaced regularly to continue to be effective.

Since nuclear decay follows first-order kinetics, we can adapt the mathematical relationships used for firstorder chemical reactions. We generally substitute the number of nuclei,  for the concentration. If the rate is stated in nuclear decays per second, we refer to it as the activity of the radioactive sample. The rate for radioactive decay is:

decay rate  with  the decay constant for the particular radioisotope

The decay constant,  , which is the same as a rate constant discussed in the kinetics chapter. It is possible to express the decay constant in terms of the half-life,  :

The first-order equations relating amount,  , and time are:

where  is the initial number of nuclei or moles of the isotope, and  is the number of nuclei/moles remaining at time  Example 21.5 applies these calculations to find the rates of radioactive decay for specific nuclides.

EXAMPLE 21.5

Rates of Radioactive Decay

 decays with a half-life of 5.27 years to produce 

(a) What is the decay constant for the radioactive disintegration of cobalt-60?   
(b) Calculate the fraction of a sample of the  isotope that will remain after 15 years.   
(c) How long does it take for a sample of  to disintegrate to the extent that only  of the original amount remains?

Solution

(a) The value of the rate constant is given by:

(b) The fraction of that is left after time tis given by Rearranging the first-order relationship Nt=  to solve for this ratio yields:

The fraction of  that will remain after 15.0 years is 0.138. Or put another way,  of the  originally present will remain after 15 years.

(c)  of the original amount of  is equal to  . Substituting this into the equation for time for first-order kinetics, we have:

Check Your Learning

Radon-222,  has a half-life of 3.823 days. How long will it take a sample of radon-222 with a mass of  to decay into other elements, leaving only  of radon-222?

Answer:

11.1 days

Because each nuclide has a specific number of nucleons, a particular balance of repulsion and attraction, and its eye oafrs;t itsh2e4h,a0l0f-0liyveasrosf; citsiv3e.8n2udclaiydse;savnadreylewimde lnyt.-1F1or1  e(Rxag fmoprlre:otehnetgheanlif-ulimfe) iosf       seconds. The half-lives of a number of radioactive isotopes important to medicine are shown in Table  , and others are listed in Appendix M.

Radiometric Dating

Several radioisotopes have half-lives and other properties that make them useful for purposes of “dating” the origin of objects such as archaeological artifacts, formerly living organisms, or geological formations. This process is radiometric dating and has been responsible for many breakthrough scientific discoveries about

the geological history of the earth, the evolution of life, and the history of human civilization. We will explore some of the most common types of radioactive dating and how the particular isotopes work for each type.

Radioactive Dating Using Carbon-14

The radioactivity of carbon-14 provides a method for dating objects that were a part of a living organism. This method of radiometric dating, which is also called radiocarbon dating or carbon-14 dating, is accurate for dating carbon-containing substances that are up to about 30,000 years old, and can provide reasonably accurate dates up to a maximum of about 50,000 years old.

Naturally occurring carbon consists of three isotopes:  which constitutes about  of the carbon on earth;  about  of the total; and trace amounts of  Carbon-14 forms in the upper atmosphere by the reaction of nitrogen atoms with neutrons from cosmic rays in space:

All isotopes of carbon react with oxygen to produce  molecules. The ratio of  to  depends on the ratio of  to  in the atmosphere. The natural abundance of  in the atmosphere is approximately 1 part per trillion; until recently, this has generally been constant over time, as seen is gas samples found trapped in ice. The incorporation of  and  into plants is a regular part of the photosynthesis process, which means that the  ratio found in a living plant is the same as the  ratio in the atmosphere. But when the plant dies, it no longer traps carbon through photosynthesis. Because  is a stable isotope and does not undergo radioactive decay, its concentration in the plant does not change. However, carbon-14 decays by  emission with a half-life of 5730 years:

Thus, the  ratio gradually decreases after the plant dies. The decrease in the ratio with time provides a measure of the time that has elapsed since the death of the plant (or other organism that ate the plant). Figure 21.11 visually depicts this process.

For example, with the half-life of  being 5730 years, if the  ratio in a wooden object found in an archaeological dig is half what it is in a living tree, this indicates that the wooden object is 5730 years old. Highly accurate determinations of  ratios can be obtained from very small samples (as little as a milligram) by the use of a mass spectrometer.

LINK TO LEARNING

Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/16phetradiom) to perform simulations of radiometric dating.

EXAMPLE 21.6

Radiocarbon Dating

A tiny piece of paper (produced from formerly living plant matter) taken from the Dead Sea Scrolls has an activity of 10.8 disintegrations per minute per gram of carbon. If the initial C-14 activity was 13.6 disintegrations  of C, estimate the age of the Dead Sea Scrolls.

Solution

The rate of decay (number of disintegrations/minute/gram of carbon) is proportional to the amount of radioactive C-14 left in the paper, so we can substitute the rates for the amounts,  , in the relationship:

where the subscript 0 represents the time when the plants were cut to make the paper, and the subscript t represents the current time.

The decay constant can be determined from the half-life of C-14, 5730 years:

Substituting and solving, we have:

Therefore, the Dead Sea Scrolls are approximately 1900 years old (Figure 21.12).

Check Your Learning

More accurate dates of the reigns of ancient Egyptian pharaohs have been determined recently using plants that were preserved in their tombs. Samples of seeds and plant matter from King Tutankhamun’s tomb have a C-14 decay rate of 9.07 disintegrations/min/g of C. How long ago did King Tut’s reign come to an end?

Answer:

about 3350 years ago, or approximately 1340 BC

There have been some significant, well-documented changes to the  ratio. The accuracy of a straightforward application of this technique depends on the  ratio in a living plant being the same now as it was in an earlier era, but this is not always valid. Due to the increasing accumulation of  molecules (largely  in the atmosphere caused by combustion of fossil fuels (in which essentially all of  nhatshed eactamyoesdp),htehre  rcatiuos eosf  hreataitomto sdpechreraesem,aynbdetchihsaingtiunrg.nTafhfiesctmsatnhemradtieoi inc rceuarsre intly     
living organisms on the earth. Fortunately, however, we can use other data, such as tree dating via examination of annual growth rings, to calculate correction factors. With these correction factors, accurate dates can be determined. In general, radioactive dating only works for about 10 half-lives; therefore, the limit for carbon-14 dating is about 57,000 years.

Radioactive Dating Using Nuclides Other than Carbon-14

Radioactive dating can also use other radioactive nuclides with longer half-lives to date older events. For example, uranium-238 (which decays in a series of steps into lead-206) can be used for establishing the age of rocks (and the approximate age of the oldest rocks on earth). Since U-238 has a half-life of 4.5 billion years, it takes that amount of time for half of the original U-238 to decay into Pb-206. In a sample of rock that does not contain appreciable amounts of Pb-208, the most abundant isotope of lead, we can assume that lead was not present when the rock was formed. Therefore, by measuring and analyzing the ratio of U-238:Pb-206, we can determine the age of the rock. This assumes that all of the lead-206 present came from the decay of uranium-238. If there is additional lead-206 present, which is indicated by the presence of other lead isotopes in the sample, it is necessary to make an adjustment. Potassium-argon dating uses a similar method. K-40 decays by positron emission and electron capture to form Ar-40 with a half-life of 1.25 billion years. If a rock sample is crushed and the amount of Ar-40 gas that escapes is measured, determination of the Ar-40:K-40

ratio yields the age of the rock. Other methods, such as rubidium-strontium dating (Rb-87 decays into Sr-87 with a half-life of 48.8 billion years), operate on the same principle. To estimate the lower limit for the earth’s age, scientists determine the age of various rocks and minerals, making the assumption that the earth is older than the oldest rocks and minerals in its crust. As of 2014, the oldest known rocks on earth are the Jack Hills zircons from Australia, found by uranium-lead dating to be almost 4.4 billion years old.

EXAMPLE 21.7

Radioactive Dating of Rocks

An igneous rock contains  of U-238 and  of  , and much, much smaller amounts of Pb-208. Determine the approximate time at which the rock formed.

Solution

The sample of rock contains very little Pb-208, the most common isotope of lead, so we can safely assume that all the Pb-206 in the rock was produced by the radioactive decay of U-238. When the rock formed, it contained all of the U-238 currently in it, plus some U-238 that has since undergone radioactive decay.

The amount of U-238 currently in the rock is:

Because when one mole of U-238 decays, it produces one mole of Pb-206, the amount of U-238 that has undergone radioactive decay since the rock was formed is:

The total amount of U-238 originally present in the rock is therefore:

The amount of time that has passed since the formation of the rock is given by:

with  representing the original amount of U-238 and  representing the present amount of U-238.

U-238 decays into Pb-206 with a half-life of  , so the decay constant  is:

Substituting and solving, we have:

Therefore, the rock is approximately 1.7 billion years old.

Check Your Learning

A sample of rock contains  of Rb-87 and  of Sr-87. Calculate the age of the rock. (The half-life of the  decay of Rb-87 is  y.)

Answer: