13.1.1 Overview

Let us now distance ourselves from the exact details of an I/O device. While designing a computer system, it is not possible for designers to consider all possible types of I/O devices. Even if they do, it is possible that a new class of devices might come up after the computer has been sold. For example, tablet PCs such as the Apple iPad were not there in 2005. Nonetheless, it is still possible to transfer data between an iPad and older PCs. This is possible because most designers provide standard interfaces in their computer system. For example, a typical desktop or laptop has a set of USB ports. Any device that is compliant with the USB specification can be connected to the USB port, and can then communicate with the host computer. Similarly, it is possible to attach almost any monitor or projector with any laptop computer. This is because laptops have a generic DVI port that can be connected to any monitor. Laptop companies obey their part of the DVI specification by implementing a DVI port that can seamlessly transfer data between the processor and the port. On similar lines, monitor companies obey their part of the DVI specification by ensuring that their monitors can seamlessly display all the data that is being sent on the DVI port. Thus, we need to ensure that our computer provides support for a finite set of interfaces with peripherals. It should then be possible to attach any peripheral at run time.

The reader should note that just because it is possible to attach a generic I/O device by implementing the specification of a port, it does not mean that the I/O device will work. For example, we can always connect a printer to the USB port. However, the printer might not be able to print a page. This is because, we need additional support at the software level to operate the printer. This support is built into the printer device drivers in the operating system that can efficiently transfer data from user programs to the printer.

Roles of Software and Hardware

We thus need to clearly differentiate between the roles of software and hardware. Let us first look at software. Most operating systems define a very simple user interface for accessing I/O devices. For example, the Linux operating system has two system calls, read and write, with the following specifications.

read(int file_descriptor, void \*buffer, int num_bytes) write(int file_descriptor, void \*buffer, int num_bytes)

Linux treats all devices as files, and allots them a file descriptor. The file descriptor is the first argument, and it specifies the id of the device. For example, the speaker has a certain file descriptor, and a printer has a different file descriptor. The second argument points to an area in memory that contains the source or destination of the data, and the last argument represents the number of bytes that need to be transferred. From the point of view of a user, this is all that needs to be done. It is the job of the operating system’s device drivers, and the hardware to co-ordinate the rest of the process. This approach has proved to be an extremely versatile method for accessing I/O devices.

Unfortunately, the operating system needs to do more work. For each I/O call it needs to locate the appropriate device driver and pass on the request. It is possible that multiple processes might be trying to access the same I/O device. In this case, the different requests need to be properly scheduled.

The job of the device driver is to interface with native hardware and perform the desired action. The device driver typically uses assembly instructions to communicate with the hardware device. It first assesses its status, and if it is free, then it asks the peripheral device to perform the desired action. The device driver initiates the process of transfer of data between the memory system and the peripheral device.

Figure 13.2 encapsulates the discussion up till now. The upper part of the diagram shows the software modules (application, operating system, device driver), and the lower part of the diagram shows the hardware modules. The device driver uses I/O instructions to communicate with the processor, and the processor then routes the commands to the appropriate I/O device. When the I/O device has some data to send to the processor, it sends an interrupt, and then the interrupt service routine reads the data, and passes it on to the application.

We summarized the entire I/O process in just one paragraph. However, the reader should note that this is an extremely complicated process, and entire books are devoted to the study and design of device drivers. In this book, we shall limit our discussion to the hardware part of the I/O system, and take a cursory look at the software support that is required. The important points of difference between the software and hardware components of the I/O system are enumerated in Point 21.

Important Point 21

The role of software and hardware in the I/O system:

1. The software component of the I/O system consists of the application, and the operating system. The application is typically provided a very simple interface to access  devices. The role of the operating system is to collate the I/O requests from different applications, appropriately schedule them, and pass them on to the corresponding device drivers.   
2. The device drivers communicate with the hardware device through special assembly instructions. They co-ordinate the transfer of data, control, and status information between the processor and the I/O devices.   
3. The role of the hardware (processor, and associated circuitry) is to just act as a messenger between the operating system, and the I/O devices, which are connected to dedicated I/O ports. For example, if we connect a digital camera to a USB port, then the processor is unaware of the details of the connected device. Its only role is to ensure seamless communication between the device driver of the camera, and the USB port that is connected to the camera.   
4. It is possible for the I/O device to initiate communication with the processor by sending an interrupt. This interrupts the currently executing program, and invokes the interrupt service routine. The interrupt service routine passes on control to the corresponding device driver. The device driver then processes the interrupt, and takes appropriate action.

Let us now discuss the architecture of the hardware component of the  system in detail.