7.4.2 Content Addressable Memory (CAM)

CAM Cell

In this section, we shall look at a special type of memory cell called a CAM (Content Addressable Memory) cell. First, consider an SRAM array. A typical SRAM array is a matrix of SRAM cells. Each row contains a vector of data. A given row is addressed or located by using a specific set of address bits. However, it is possible to locate a row using a different method. We can address a row by its content. For example, if each row contains 32 SRAM cells, then we can think of the contents of a row as a 32-bit number. We wish to address the row this 32-bit number. For example, if a row contains 0x AB 12 32 54, then we should be able to find the index of the row that contains this value. Such a memory is known as a CAM memory, and each basic cell is known as a CAM cell. A CAM memory is typically used to implement a hashtable(see [Cormen et al., 2009]) in hardware. A hashtable saves key-value pairs such as (name and address). We address a hashtable by its key, and read the value. It is a more flexible data structure than an array, because we are not limited to integer indices. We shall use CAM arrays to implement some memory structures in Chapter 11.

Let us take a look at a 10 transistor CAM cell in Figure 7.28. If the value stored in the SRAM cell,  , is not equal to the input bit,  , then we wish to set the value of the match line to 0. In the CAM cell, the upper half is a regular SRAM cell with 6 transistors. We have 4 extra transistors in the lower half. Let us now consider transistor  . It is connected to a global match line, and transistor  .  is controlled, by the value,  , which is stored in the SRAM cell, and  is controlled by  . Let us assume that  . If both of them are 1, then transistors  and  are in the ON state, and there is a direct conducting path between the match line and ground. Thus, the value of the match line will get set to 0. However, if  and  are both  , then the path through  and  is not conducting. But, in this case, the path through  , and  becomes conducting, because the gates of these transistors are connected to  , and  , respectively. The input to both the gates is a logical 1. Thus, the match line will be pulled down to 0. The reader can verify that if  , no conducting path is formed. Thus, a CAM cell drives the match line to a logical  , if there is a mismatch between the value stored and the input bit,  .

Array of CAM Cells

Figure 7.29 shows an array of CAM cells. The structure is mostly similar to an SRAM array. We can address a row by its index, and perform a read/write access. Additionally, we can compare each row of the CAM cell with the input,  . If any row matches the input, then the corresponding match line will have a value of 1. We can compute a logical OR of all the match lines, and decide if we have a match in the CAM array or not. Additionally, we can connect all the match lines of the CAM array to a priority encoder to find the index of the row that matches the data.