22.5 Beneficial Prokaryotes

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Explain the need for nitrogen fixation and how it is accomplished Describe the beneficial effects of bacteria that colonize our skin and digestive tracts Identify prokaryotes used during the processing of food • Describe the use of prokaryotes in bioremediation

Fortunately, only a few species of prokaryotes are pathogenic! Prokaryotes also interact with humans and other organisms in a number of ways that are beneficial. For example, prokaryotes are major participants in the carbon and nitrogen cycles. They produce or process nutrients in the digestive tracts of humans and other animals. Prokaryotes are used in the production of some human foods, and also have been recruited for the degradation of hazardous materials. In fact, our life would not be possible without prokaryotes!

Cooperation between Bacteria and Eukaryotes: Nitrogen Fixation

Nitrogen is a very important element to living things, because it is part of nucleotides and amino acids that are the building blocks of nucleic acids and proteins, respectively. Nitrogen is usually the most limiting element in terrestrial ecosystems, with atmospheric nitrogen,  , providing the largest pool of available nitrogen. However, eukaryotes cannot use atmospheric, gaseous nitrogen to synthesize macromolecules. Fortunately, nitrogen can be “fixed,” meaning it is converted into a more accessible form—ammonia  —either biologically or abiotically.

Abiotic nitrogen fixation occurs as a result of physical processes such as lightning or by industrial processes. Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is exclusively carried out by prokaryotes: soil bacteria, cyanobacteria, and Frankiaspp. (filamentous bacteria interacting with actinorhizal plants such as alder, bayberry, and sweet fern). After photosynthesis, BNF is the most important biological process on Earth. The overall nitrogen fixation equation below represents a series of redoxreactions(Pi stands for inorganic phosphate).

The total fixed nitrogen through BNF is about 100 to 180 million metric tons per year, which contributes about 65 percent of the nitrogen used in agriculture.

Cyanobacteria are the most important nitrogen fixers in aquatic environments. In soil, members of the genera Clostridiumand Azotobacterare examples of free-living, nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Other bacteria live symbiotically with legume plants, providing the most important source of fixed nitrogen. Symbionts may fix more nitrogen in soils than free-living organisms by a factor of 10. Soil bacteria, collectively called rhizobia, are able to symbiotically interact with legumes to form nodules, specialized structures where nitrogen fixation occurs (Figure 22.27). Nitrogenase, the enzyme that fixes nitrogen, is inactivated by oxygen, so the nodule provides an oxygen-free area for nitrogen fixation to take place. The oxygen is sequestered by a form of plant hemoglobin called leghemoglobin, which protects the nitrogenase, but releases enough oxygen to support respiratory activity.

Symbiotic nitrogen fixation provides a natural and inexpensive plant fertilizer: It reduces atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia, which is easily usable by plants. The use of legumes is an excellent alternative to chemical fertilization and is of special interest to sustainableagriculture, which seeks to minimize the use of chemicals and conserve natural resources. Through symbiotic nitrogen fixation, the plant benefits from using an endless source of nitrogen: the atmosphere. The bacteria benefit from using photosynthates (carbohydrates produced during photosynthesis) from the plant and having a protected niche. In addition, the soil benefits from being naturally fertilized. Therefore, the use of rhizobia as biofertilizers is a sustainable practice.

Why are legumes so important? Some, like soybeans, are key sources of agricultural protein. Some of the most important legumes consumed by humans are soybeans, peanuts, peas, chickpeas, and beans. Other legumes, such as alfalfa, are used to feed cattle.

Everyday Connection

Microbes on the Human Body

The commensal bacteria that inhabit our skin and gastrointestinal tract do a host of good things for us. They protect us from pathogens, help us digest our food, and produce some of our vitamins and other nutrients. These activities have been known for a long time. More recently, scientists have gathered evidence that these bacteria may also help regulate our moods, influence our activity levels, and even help control weight by affecting our food choices and absorption patterns. The Human Microbiome Project has begun the process of cataloging our normal bacteria (and archaea) so we can better understand these functions.

A particularly fascinating example of our normal flora relates to our digestive systems. People who take high doses of antibiotics tend to lose many of their normal gut bacteria, allowing a naturally antibiotic-resistant species called Clostridiumdificileto overgrow and cause severe gastric problems, especially chronic diarrhea (Figure 22.28). Obviously, trying to treat this problem with antibiotics only makes it worse. However, it has been successfully treated by giving the patients fecal transplants from healthy donors to reestablish the normal intestinal microbial community. Clinical trials are underway to ensure the safety and effectiveness of this technique.

Scientists are also discovering that the absence of certain key microbes from our intestinal tract may set us up for a variety of problems. This seems to be particularly true regarding the appropriate functioning of the immune system. There are intriguing findings that suggest that the absence of these microbes is an important contributor to the development of allergies and some autoimmune disorders. Research is currently underway to test whether adding certain microbes to our internal ecosystem may help in the treatment of these problems, as well as in treating some forms of autism.

Early Biotechnology: Cheese, Bread, Wine, Beer, and Yogurt

According to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, biotechnology is “any technological application that uses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes for specific use."5 The concept of “specific use” involves some sort of commercial application. Genetic engineering, artificial selection, antibiotic production, and cell culture are current topics of study in biotechnology and will be described in later chapters. However, humans were using prokaryotes before the term biotechnology was even coined. Some of the products of this early biotechnology are as familiar as cheese, bread, wine, beer, and yogurt, which employ both bacteria and other microbes, such as yeast, a fungus (Figure 22.29).

Cheese production began around 4,000 to 7,000 years ago when humans began to breed animals and process their milk. Fermentation in this case preserves nutrients: Milk will spoil relatively quickly, but when processed as cheese, it is more stable. As for beer, the oldest records of brewing are about 6,000 years old and were an integral part of the Sumerian culture. Evidence indicates that the Sumerians discovered fermentation by chance. Wine has been produced for about 4,500 years, and evidence suggests that cultured milk products, like yogurt, have existed for at least 4,000 years.

Using Prokaryotes to Clean up Our Planet: Bioremediation

Microbial bioremediation is the use of prokaryotes (or microbial metabolism) to remove pollutants. Bioremediation has been used to remove agricultural chemicals (e.g., pesticides, fertilizers) that leach from soil into groundwater and the subsurface. Certain toxic metals and oxides, such as selenium and arsenic compounds, can also be removed from water by bioremediation. The reduction of  to  and to  (metallic selenium) is a method used to remove selenium ions from water. Mercury  is an example of a toxic metal that can be removed from an environment by bioremediation. As an active ingredient of some pesticides, mercury is used in industry and is also a by-product of certain processes, such as battery production. Methyl mercury is usually present in very low concentrations in natural environments, but it is highly toxic because it accumulates in living tissues. Several species of bacteria can carry out the biotransformation of toxic mercury into nontoxic forms. These bacteria, such as Pseudomonasaeruginosa, can convert  into  , which is nontoxic to humans.

One of the most useful and interesting examples of the use of prokaryotes for bioremediation purposes is the cleanup of oil spills. The significance of prokaryotes to petroleum bioremediation has been demonstrated in several oil spills in recent years, such as the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska (1989) (Figure 22.30), the Prestige oil spill in Spain (2002), the spill into the Mediterranean from a Lebanon power plant (2006), and more recently, the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico (2010). In the case of oil spills in the ocean, ongoing natural bioremediation tends to occur, since there are oil-consuming bacteria in the ocean prior to the spill. In addition to these naturally occurring oil-degrading bacteria, humans select and engineer bacteria that possess the same capability with increased efficacy and spectrum of hydrocarbon compounds that can be processed. Bioremediation is enhanced by the addition of inorganic nutrients that help bacteria to grow.

Some hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria feed on hydrocarbons in the oil droplet, breaking down the hydrocarbons into smaller subunits. Some species, such as Alcanivoraxborkumensis, produce surfactants that solubilizethe oil (making it soluble in water), whereas other bacteria degrade the oil into carbon dioxide. Under ideal conditions, it has been reported that up to 80 percent of the nonvolatile components in oil can be degraded within one year of the spill. Other oil fractions containing aromatic and highly branched hydrocarbon chains are more difficult to remove and remain in the environment for longer periods of time.

KEY TERMS

acidophile organism with optimal growth pH of three or below   
alkaliphile organism with optimal growth pH of nine or above   
ammonification process by which ammonia is released during the decomposition of nitrogen-containing organic compounds   
anaerobic refers to organisms that grow without oxygen   
anoxic without oxygen   
antibiotic biological substance that, in low concentration, is antagonistic to the growth of prokaryotes   
biofilm microbial community that is held together by a gummy-textured matrix   
biological nitrogen fixation conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia exclusively carried out by prokaryotes   
bioremediation use of microbial metabolism to remove pollutants   
biotechnology any technological application that uses living organisms, biological systems, or their derivatives to produce or modify other products   
Black Death devastating pandemic that is believed to have been an outbreak of bubonic plague caused by the bacteriumYersiniapestis   
botulism disease produced by the toxin of the anaerobic bacteriumClostridiumbotulinum   
CA-MRSA MRSA acquired in the community rather than in a hospital   
capsule external structure that enables a prokaryote to attach to surfaces and protects it from dehydration   
chemotroph organism that obtains energy from chemical compounds   
conjugation process by which prokaryotes move DNA from one individual to another using a pilus   
cyanobacteria bacteria that evolved from early phototrophs and oxygenated the atmosphere; also known as bluegreen algae   
decomposer organism that carries out the decomposition of dead organisms   
denitrification transformation of nitrate from soil to gaseous nitrogen compounds such as  NO, and    
emerging disease disease making an initial appearance in a population or that is increasing in incidence or geographic range   
endemic disease disease that is constantly present, usually at low incidence, in a population   
epidemic disease that occurs in an unusually high number of individuals in a population at the same time   
extremophile organism that grows under extreme or harsh conditions   
foodborne disease any illness resulting from the consumption of contaminated food, or of the pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or other parasites that contaminate food   
Gram negative bacterium whose cell wall contains little peptidoglycan but has an outer membrane   
Gram positive bacterium that contains mainly peptidoglycan in its cell walls   
halophile organism that require a salt concentration of at least 0.2 M   
hydrothermal vent fissure in Earth’s surface that releases geothermally heated water   
hyperthermophile organism that grows at temperatures between    
microbial mat multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes that may include bacteria and archaea   
MRSA (methicillin-resistantStaphylococ usaureus) very dangerous Staphylococ usaureusstrain resistant to multiple antibiotics   
nitrification conversion of ammonium into nitrite and nitrate in soils   
nitrogen fixation process by which gaseous nitrogen is transformed, or “fixed” into more readily available forms such as ammonia   
nodule novel structure on the roots of certain plants (legumes) that results from the symbiotic interaction between the plant and soil bacteria, and is the site of nitrogen fixation   
nutrient essential substances for growth, such as carbon and nitrogen   
osmophile organism that grows in a high sugar concentration   
pandemic widespread, usually worldwide, epidemic disease   
peptidoglycan material composed of polysaccharide chains cross-linked to unusual peptides   
phototroph organism that is able to make its own food by converting solar energy to chemical energy   
pilus surface appendage of some prokaryotes used for attachment to surfaces including other prokaryotes   
pseudopeptidoglycan component of archaea cell walls that is similar to peptidoglycan in morphology but contains different sugars   
psychrophile organism that grows at temperatures of -15  or lower   
radioresistant organism that grows in high levels of radiation   
resuscitation process by which prokaryotes that are in the VBNC state return to viability   
S-layer surface-layer protein present on the outside of cell walls of archaea and bacteria   
serotype strain of bacterium that carries a set of similar antigens on its cell surface, often many in a bacterial species   
stromatolite layered sedimentary structure formed by precipitation of minerals by prokaryotes in microbial mats   
teichoic acid polymer associated with the cell wall of Grampositive bacteria   
thermophile organism that lives at temperatures between    
transduction process by which a bacteriophage moves DNA from one prokaryote to another   
transformation process by which a prokaryote takes in DNA found in its environment that is shed by other prokaryotes   
viable-but-non-culturable (VBNC) state survival mechanism of bacteria facing environmental stress conditions   
zoonosis disease that primarily infects animals that is transmitted to humans

CHAPTER SUMMARY 22.1 Prokaryotic Diversity

Prokaryotes existed for billions of years before plants and animals appeared. Hot springs and hydrothermal vents may have been the environments in which life began. Microbial mats are thought to represent the earliest forms of life on Earth. A microbial mat is a multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes that grows at interfaces between different types of material, mostly on moist surfaces. Fossilized microbial mats are called stromatolites and consist of laminated organo-sedimentary structures formed by precipitation of minerals by prokaryotes. They represent the earliest fossil record of life on Earth.

During the first two billion years, the atmosphere was anoxic and only anaerobic organisms were able to live. Cyanobacteria evolved from early phototrophs and began the oxygenation o the atmosphere. The increase in oxygen concentration allowed the evolution of other life forms.

Bacteria and archaea grow in virtually every environment. Those that survive under extreme conditions are called extremophiles (extreme lovers). Some prokaryotes cannot grow in a laboratory setting, but they are not dead. They are in the viable-but-non-culturable (VBNC) state. The VBNC state occurs when prokaryotes enter a dormant state in response to environmental stressors. Most prokaryotes are colonial and prefer to live in communities where interactions take place. A biofilm is a microbial community held together in a gummy-textured matrix.

22.2 Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea

Prokaryotes (domains Archaea and Bacteria) are singlecelled organisms that lack a nucleus. They have a single piece of circular DNA in the nucleoid area of the cell. Most prokaryotes have a cell wall that lies outside the boundary of the plasma membrane. Some prokaryotes may have additional structures such as a capsule, flagella, and pili. Bacteria and Archaea differ in the lipid composition of their cell membranes and the characteristics of the cell wall. In archaeal membranes, phytanyl units, rather than fatty acids, are linked to glycerol. Some archaeal membranes are lipid

monolayers instead of bilayers.

The cell wall is located outside the cell membrane and prevents osmotic lysis. The chemical composition of cell walls varies between species. Bacterial cell walls contain peptidoglycan. Archaean cell walls do not have peptidoglycan, but they may have pseudopeptidoglycan, polysaccharides, glycoproteins, or protein-based cell walls. Bacteria can be divided into two major groups: Gram positive and Gram negative, based on the Gram stain reaction. Gram-positive organisms have a thick peptidoglycan layer fortified with teichoic acids. Gramnegative organisms have a thin cell wall and an outer envelope containing lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins.

Prokaryotes can transfer DNA from one cell to another by three mechanisms: transformation (uptake of environmental DNA), transduction (transfer of genomic DNA via viruses), and conjugation (transfer of DNA by direct cell contact).

22.3 Prokaryotic Metabolism

As the oldest living inhabitants of Earth, prokaryotes are also the most metabolically diverse; they flourish in many different environments with various energy and carbon sources, variable temperature, pH, pressure, oxygen and water availability. Nutrients required in large amounts are called macronutrients, whereas those required in trace amounts are called micronutrients or trace elements. Macronutrients include C, H, O, N, P, S, K, Mg, Ca, and Na. In addition to these macronutrients, prokaryotes require various metallic elements for growth and enzyme function. Prokaryotes use different sources of energy to assemble macromolecules from smaller molecules. Phototrophs obtain their energy from sunlight, whereas chemotrophs obtain energy from chemical compounds. Energy-producing pathways may be either aerobic or anaerobic.

Prokaryotes play roles in the carbon and nitrogen cycles. Producers capture carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and convert it to organic compounds. Consumers (animals and other chemoorganotrophic organisms) use organic compounds generated by producers and release carbon dioxide into the atmosphere by respiration. Carbon dioxide is also returned to the atmosphere by the microbial decomposers of dead organisms. Nitrogen also cycles in and out of living organisms, from organic compounds to ammonia, ammonium ions, nitrite, nitrate, and nitrogen gas. Prokaryotes are essential for most of these conversions. Gaseous nitrogen is transformed into ammonia through nitrogen fixation. Ammonia is anaerobically catabolized by some prokaryotes, yielding  as the final product. Nitrification is the conversion of ammonium into nitrite. Nitrification in soils is carried out by bacteria. Denitrification is also performed by bacteria and transforms nitrate from soils into gaseous nitrogen compounds, such as  , NO, and  .

22.4 Bacterial Diseases in Humans

Some prokaryotes are human pathogens. Devastating diseases and plagues have been among us since early times and remain among the leading causes of death worldwide. Emerging diseases are those rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range. They can be new or re-emerging diseases (previously under control). Many emerging diseases affecting humans originate in animals (zoonoses), such as brucellosis. A group of re-emerging bacterial diseases recently identified by WHO for monitoring include bubonic plague, diphtheria, and cholera. Foodborne diseases result from the consumption of food contaminated with food, pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or parasites.

Some bacterial infections have been associated with biofilms: Legionnaires’ disease, otitis media, and infection of patients with cystic fibrosis. Biofilms can grow on human tissues, like dental plaque; colonize medical devices; and cause infection or produce foodborne disease by growing on the surfaces of food and food-processing equipment.

Biofilms are resistant to most of the methods used to control microbial growth. The excessive use of antibiotics has resulted in a major global problem, since resistant forms of bacteria have been selected over time. A very dangerous strain, methicillin-resistant Staphylococ usaureus(MRSA), has wreaked havoc recently across the world.

22.5 Beneficial Prokaryotes

Pathogens are only a small percentage of all prokaryotes. In fact, prokaryotes provide essential services to humans and other organisms. Nitrogen, which is not usable by eukaryotes in its plentiful atmospheric form, can be “fixed,” or converted into ammonia  either biologically or abiotically. Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is exclusively carried out by prokaryotes, and constitutes the second most important biological process on Earth. Although some terrestrial nitrogen is fixed by free-living bacteria, most BNF comes from the symbiotic interaction between soil rhizobia and the roots of legume plants.

Human life is only possible due to the action of microbes, both those in the environment and those species that call us home. Internally, they help us digest our food, produce vital nutrients for us, protect us from pathogenic microbes, and help train our immune systems to function properly.

Microbial bioremediation is the use of microbial metabolism to remove pollutants. Bioremediation has been used to remove agricultural chemicals that leach from soil into groundwater and the subsurface. Toxic metals and oxides, such as selenium and arsenic compounds, can also be removed by bioremediation. Probably one of the most useful and interesting examples of the use of prokaryotes for bioremediation purposes is the cleanup of oil spills.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 22.8 Compared to free-floating bacteria, bacteria in biofilms often show increased resistance to antibiotics and detergents. Why do you think this might be the case?

2. Figure 22.16 Which of the following statements is true?

a. Gram-positive bacteria have a single cell wall anchored to the cell membrane by lipoteichoic acid.   
b. Porins allow entry of substances into both Grampositive and Gram-negative bacteria.   
c. The cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria is thick, and the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria is thin.   
d. Gram-negative bacteria have a cell wall made of peptidoglycan, whereas Gram-positive bacteria have a cell wall made of lipoteichoic acid.

3. Figure 22.19 Which of the following statements about the nitrogen cycle is false?

a. Nitrogen fixing bacteria exist on the root nodules of legumes and in the soil.   
b. Denitrifying bacteria convert nitrates  into nitrogen gas  .   
c. Ammonification is the process by which ammonium ion  is released from decomposing organic compounds.   
d. Nitrification is the process by which nitrites  ) are converted to ammonium ion  .

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. The first forms of life on Earth were thought to be

a. single-celled plants   
b. prokaryotes   
c. insects   
d. large animals such as dinosaurs

5. Microbial mats

a. are the earliest forms of life on Earth   
b. obtained their energy and food from hydrothermal vents   
c. are multi-layered sheets of prokaryotes including mostly bacteria but also archaea   
d. all of the above

6. The first organisms that oxygenated the atmosphere were

a. cyanobacteria b. phototrophic organisms c. anaerobic organisms d. all of the above

7. Halophiles are organisms that require a. a salt concentration of at least 0.2 M b. high sugar concentration c. the addition of halogens d. all of the above

8. Many of the first prokaryotes to be cultured in a scientific lab were human or animal pathogens. Why would these species be more readily cultured than non-pathogenic prokaryotes?

a. Pathogenic prokaryotes are hardier than nonpathogenic prokaryotes.   
b. Non-pathogenic prokaryotes require more supplements in their growth media.   
c. Most of the necessary culture conditions could be inferred for pathogenic prokaryotes.   
d. Pathogenic bacteria can grow as free bacteria, but non-pathogenic bacteria only grow as parts of large colonies.

9. The presence of a membrane-enclosed nucleus is a characteristic of

a. prokaryotic cells b. eukaryotic cells c. all cells   
d. viruses

10. Which of the following consist of prokaryotic cells?

a. bacteria and fungi b. archaea and fungi c. protists and animals d. bacteria and archaea

11. The cell wall is

a. interior to the cell membrane   
b. exterior to the cell membrane   
c. a part of the cell membrane   
d. interior or exterior, depending on the particular cell

12. Organisms most likely to be found in extreme environments are

a. fungi b. bacteria c. viruses d. archaea

13. Prokaryotes stain as Gram-positive or Gram-negative because of differences in the cell

a. wall b. cytoplasm c. nucleus d. chromosome

14. Pseudopeptidoglycan is a characteristic of the walls of a. eukaryotic cells b. bacterial prokaryotic cells c. archaean prokaryotic cells d. bacterial and archaean prokaryotic cells

15. The lipopolysaccharide layer (LPS) is a characteristic of the wall of

a. archaean cells b. Gram-negative bacteria c. bacterial prokaryotic cells d. eukaryotic cells

16. Which of the following elements is nota micronutrient?

a. boron b. calcium c. chromium d. manganese

17. Prokaryotes that obtain their energy from chemical compounds are called

a. phototrophs b. auxotrophs c. chemotrophs d. lithotrophs

18. Ammonification is the process by which

a. ammonia is released during the decomposition of nitrogen-containing organic compounds   
b. ammonium is converted to nitrite and nitrate in soils   
c. nitrate from soil is transformed to gaseous nitrogen compounds such as NO,  , and    
d. gaseous nitrogen is fixed to yield ammonia

19. Plants use carbon dioxide from the air and are therefore called

a. consumers b. producers c. decomposer d. carbon fixers

20. Cyanobacteria harness energy from the sun through photosynthesis, and oxidize water to provide electrons for energy generation. Thus, we classify cyanobacteria as

a. photolithotrophs b. photoautotrophs c. chemolithoautotrophs d. chemo-organotrophs

21. A disease that is constantly present in a population is called

a. pandemic b. epidemic c. endemic d. re-emerging

22. Which of the statements about biofilms is incorrect?

a. Biofilms are considered responsible for diseases such as cystic fibrosis.   
b. Biofilms produce dental plaque, and colonize catheters and prostheses.   
c. Biofilms colonize open wounds and burned tissue.   
d. All statements are incorrect.

23. Which of these statements is true?

a. An antibiotic is any substance produced by a organism that is antagonistic to the growth of prokaryotes.   
b. An antibiotic is any substance produced by a prokaryote that is antagonistic to the growth of other viruses.   
c. An antibiotic is any substance produced by a prokaryote that is antagonistic to the growth of eukaryotic cells.   
d. An antibiotic is any substance produced by a prokaryote that prevents growth of the same prokaryote.

24. A person in England arrives at a medical clinic with a fever and swollen lymph nodes shortly after returning from a visit to New Mexico. For which bacteria should the doctor test the patient?

a. Salmonelaenterica b. Boreliaburgdorferi c. Clostridiumbotulinum d. Yersiniapestis

25. MRSA has emerged as a serious infectious disease, with the first case of methicillin-resistant S. aureusbeing detected in 1961. Why are medical professionals so concerned when antibiotics exist that can kill MRSA?

a. MRSA can transfer methicillin-resistance to other bacteria.   
b. Patients are not treated with correct antibiotics rapidly enough to prevent serious illness.   
c. MRSA could acquire additional antibiotic resistance genes from other bacteria to become a “super bug.”   
d. All of the above.

26. Which of these occurs through symbiotic nitrogen fixation?

a. The plant benefits from using an endless source of nitrogen.   
b. The soil benefits from being naturally fertilized.   
c. Bacteria benefit from using photosynthates from the plant.   
d. All of the above occur.

27. Synthetic compounds found in an organism but not normally produced or expected to be present in that organism are called

a. pesticides   
b. bioremediators   
c. recalcitrant compounds   
d. xenobiotics

28. Bioremediation includes a. the use of prokaryotes that can fix nitrogen b. the use of prokaryotes to clean up pollutants c. the use of prokaryotes as natural fertilizers d. All of the above

29. In addition to providing yogurt with its unique flavor and texture, lactic acid-producing bacteria also provide which additional benefit during food production?

a. Providing xenobiotics   
b. Lowering the pH to kill pathogenic bacteria   
c. Pasteurizing milk products   
d. Breaking down lactose for lactose-intolerant individuals

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

30. Describe briefly how you would detect the presence of a non-culturable prokaryote in an environmental sample.   
31. Why do scientists believe that the first organisms on Earth were extremophiles?   
32. A new bacterial species is discovered and classified as an endolith, an extremophile that lives inside rock. If the bacteria were discovered in the permafrost of Antarctica, describe two extremophile features the bacteria must possess.   
33. Mention three differences between bacteria and archaea.   
34. Explain the statement that both types, bacteria and archaea, have the same basic structures, but built from different chemical components.   
35. A scientist isolates a new species of prokaryote. He notes that the specimen is a bacillus with a lipid bilayer and cell wall that stains positive for peptidoglycan. Its circular chromosome replicates from a single origin of replication. Is the specimen most likely an Archaea, a Gram-positive bacterium, or a Gram-negative bacterium? How do you know?   
36. Think about the conditions (temperature, light, pressure, and organic and inorganic materials) that you may find in a deep-sea hydrothermal vent. What type of prokaryotes, in terms of their metabolic needs (autotrophs, phototrophs, chemotrophs, etc.), would you expect to find there?   
37. Farmers continually rotate the crops grown in different fields to maintain nutrients in the soil. How would planting soybeans in a field the year after the field was used to grow carrots help maintain nitrogen in the soil?   
38. Imagine a region of soil became contaminated, killing bacteria that decompose dead plants and animals. How would this effect the carbon cycle in the area? Be specific in stating where carbon would accumulate in the cycle.   
39. Explain the reason why the imprudent and excessive use of antibiotics has resulted in a major global problem.   
40. Researchers have discovered that washing spinach with water several times does not prevent foodborne diseases due to E.coli. How can you explain this fact?   
41. Your friend believes that prokaryotes are always detrimental and pathogenic. How would you explain to them that they are wrong?   
42. Many people use antimicrobial soap to kill bacteria on their hands. However, overuse may actually increase the risk of infection. How could this occur?