14.6 DNA Repair

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Discuss the different types of mutations in DNA Explain DNA repair mechanisms

DNA replication is a highly accurate process, but mistakes can occasionally occur, such as a DNA polymerase inserting a wrong base. Uncorrected mistakes may sometimes lead to serious consequences, such as cancer. Repair mechanisms correct the mistakes. In rare cases, mistakes are not corrected, leading to mutations; in other cases, repair enzymes are themselves mutated or defective.

Most of the mistakes during DNA replication are promptly corrected by the proofreading ability of DNA polymerase itself. (Figure 14.17). In proofreading, the DNA pol reads the newly added base before adding the next one, so a correction can be made. The polymerase checks whether the newly added base has paired correctly with the base in the template strand. If it is the right base, the next nucleotide is added. If an incorrect base has been added, the enzyme makes a cut at the phosphodiester bond and releases the wrong nucleotide. This is performed by the 3' exonuclease action of DNA pol. Once the incorrect nucleotide has been removed, it can be replaced by the correct one.

Some errors are not corrected during replication, but are instead corrected after replication is completed; this type of repair is known as mismatch repair (Figure 14.18). Specific repair enzymes recognize the mispaired nucleotide and excise part of the strand that contains it; the excised region is then resynthesized. If the mismatch remains uncorrected, it may lead to more permanent damage when the mismatched DNA is replicated. How do mismatch repair enzymes recognize which of the two bases is the incorrect one? In E.coli, after replication, the nitrogenous base adenine acquires a methyl group; the parental DNA strand will have methyl groups, whereas the newly synthesized strand lacks them. Thus, DNA polymerase is able to remove the wrongly incorporated bases from the newly synthesized, non-methylated strand. In eukaryotes, the mechanism is not very well understood, but it is believed to involve recognition of unsealed nicks in the new strand, as well as a short-term continuing association of some of the replication proteins with the new daughter strand after replication has completed.

Another type of repair mechanism, nucleotide excision repair, is similar to mismatch repair, except that it is used to remove damaged bases rather than mismatched ones. The repair enzymes replace abnormal bases by making a cut on both the  and 5' ends of the damaged base (Figure 14.19). The segment of DNA is removed and replaced with the correctly paired nucleotides by the action of DNA pol. Once the bases are filled in, the remaining gap is sealed with a phosphodiester linkage catalyzed by DNA ligase. This repair mechanism is often employed when UV exposure causes the formation of pyrimidine dimers.

A well-studied example of mistakes not being corrected is seen in people suffering from xeroderma pigmentosa (Figure 14.20). Affected individuals have skin that is highly sensitive to UV rays from the sun. When individuals are exposed to UV light, pyrimidine dimers, especially those of thymine, are formed; people with xeroderma pigmentosa are not able to repair the damage. These are not repaired because of a defect in the nucleotide excision repair enzymes, whereas in normal individuals, the thymine dimers are excised and the defect is corrected. The thymine dimers distort the structure of the DNA double helix, and this may cause problems during DNA replication. People with xeroderma pigmentosa may have a higher risk of contracting skin cancer than those who don't have the condition.

Errors during DNA replication are not the only reason why mutations arise in DNA. Mutations, variations in the nucleotide sequence of a genome, can also occur because of damage to DNA. Such mutations may be of two types: induced or spontaneous. Induced mutations are those that result from an exposure to chemicals, UV rays, x-rays, or some other environmental agent. Spontaneous mutations occur without any exposure to any environmental agent; they are a result of natural reactions taking place within the body.

Mutations may have a wide range of effects. Point mutations are those mutations that affect a single base pair. The most common nucleotide mutations are substitutions, in which one base is replaced by another. These substitutions can be of two types, either transitions or transversions. Transition substitution refers to a purine or pyrimidine being replaced by a base of the same kind; for example, a purine such as adenine may be replaced by the purine guanine. Transversion substitution refers to a purine being replaced by a pyrimidine, or vice versa; for example, cytosine, a pyrimidine, is replaced by adenine, a purine. Some point mutations are not expressed; these are known as silent mutations. Silent mutations are usually due to a substitution in the third base of a codon, which often represents the same amino acid as the original codon. Other point mutations can result in the replacement of one amino acid by another, which may alter the function of the protein. Point mutations that generate a stop codon can terminate a protein early.

Some mutations can result in an increased number of copies of the same codon. These are called trinucleotide repeat expansions and result in repeated regions of the same amino acid. Mutations can also be the result of the addition of a base, known as an insertion, or the removal of a base, also known as deletion. If an insertion or deletion results in the alteration of the translational reading frame (a frameshift mutation), the resultant protein is usually nonfunctional. Sometimes a piece of DNA from one chromosome may get translocated to another chromosome or to another region of the same chromosome; this is also known as translocation. These mutation types are shown in Figure 14.21.

VISUAL CONNECTION

Silent: has no effect on the protein sequence

Missense:results in an amino acid substitution

Nonsense: substitutes a stop codon for an amino acid

FrameshiftMutations

Insertions or deletions of nucleotides may result in a shift in the reading frame or insertion ofa stop codon

A frameshift mutation that results in the insertion of three nucleotides is often less deleterious than a mutation that results in the insertion of one nucleotide. Why?

Mutations in repair genes have been known to cause cancer. Many mutated repair genes have been implicated in certain forms of pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and colorectal cancer. Mutations can affect either somatic cells or germ cells. If many mutations accumulate in a somatic cell, they may lead to problems such as the uncontrolled cell division observed in cancer. If a mutation takes place in germ cells, the mutation will be passed on to the next generation, as in the case of hemophilia and xeroderma pigmentosa.

KEY TERMS

electrophoresis technique used to separate DNA fragments according to size   
helicase during replication, this enzyme helps to open up the DNA helix by breaking the hydrogen bonds   
induced mutation mutation that results from exposure to chemicals or environmental agents   
lagging strand during replication, the strand that is replicated in short fragments and away from the replication fork   
leading strand strand that is synthesized continuously in the  direction, which is synthesized in the direction of the replication fork   
ligase enzyme that catalyzes the formation of a phosphodiester linkage between the 3' OH and 5' phosphate ends of the DNA   
mismatch repair type of repair mechanism in which mismatched bases are removed after replication   
mutation variation in the nucleotide sequence of a genome   
nucleotide excision repair type of DNA repair mechanism in which the wrong base, along with a few nucleotides upstream or downstream, are removed   
Okazaki fragment DNA fragment that is synthesized in short stretches on the lagging strand   
point mutation mutation that affects a single base   
primase enzyme that synthesizes the RNA primer; the primer is needed for DNA pol to start synthesis of a new DNA strand   
primer short stretch of nucleotides that is required to initiate replication; in the case of replication, the primer has RNA nucleotides   
proofreading function of DNA pol in which it reads the newly added base before adding the next one   
replication fork Y-shaped structure formed during initiation of replication   
silent mutation mutation that is not expressed   
single-strand binding protein during replication, protein that binds to the single-stranded DNA; this helps in keeping the two strands of DNA apart so that they may serve as templates   
sliding clamp ring-shaped protein that holds the DNA pol on the DNA strand   
spontaneous mutation mutation that takes place in the cells as a result of chemical reactions taking place naturally without exposure to any external agent   
telomerase enzyme that contains a catalytic part and an inbuilt RNA template; it functions to maintain telomeres at chromosome ends   
telomere DNA at the end of linear chromosomes   
topoisomerase enzyme that causes underwinding or overwinding of DNA when DNA replication is taking place   
transformation process in which external DNA is taken up by a cell   
transition substitution when a purine is replaced with a purine or a pyrimidine is replaced with another pyrimidine   
transversion substitution when a purine is replaced by a pyrimidine or a pyrimidine is replaced by a purine

CHAPTER SUMMARY 14.1 Historical Basis of Modern Understanding

DNA was first isolated from white blood cells by Friedrich Miescher, who called it nuclein because it was isolated from nuclei. Frederick Griffith's experiments with strains of Streptococ uspneumoniaeprovided the first hint that DNA may be the transforming principle. Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty showed that DNA is required for the transformation of bacteria. Later experiments by Hershey and Chase using bacteriophage T2 proved that DNA is the genetic material. Chargaff found that the ratio of A  and C  , and that the percentage content of A, T, G, and C is different for different species.

14.2 DNA Structure and Sequencing

The currently accepted model of the double-helix structure of DNA was proposed by Watson and Crick. Some of the salient features are that the two strands that make up the double helix have complementary base sequences and anti-parallel orientations. Alternating deoxyribose sugars and phosphates form the backbone of the structure, and the nitrogenous bases are stacked like rungs inside. The diameter of the double helix,  , is uniform throughout. A purine always pairs with a pyrimidine; A pairs with T, and G pairs with C. One turn of the helix has 10 base pairs. Prokaryotes are much simpler than eukaryotes in many of their features. Most prokaryotes contain a single, circular chromosome. In general, eukaryotic chromosomes contain a linear DNA molecule packaged into nucleosomes, and have two distinct regions that can be distinguished by staining, reflecting different states of packaging and compaction.

14.3 Basics of DNA Replication

During cell division, each daughter cell receives a copy of each molecule of DNA by a process known as DNA replication. The single chromosome of a prokaryote or each chromosome of a eukaryote consists of a single continuous double helix. The model for DNA replication suggests that the two strands of the double helix separate during

replication, and each strand serves as a template from which the new complementary strand is copied. In the conservative model of replication, the parental DNA is conserved, and the daughter DNA is newly synthesized. The semi-conservative model suggests that each of the two parental DNA strands acts as template for new DNA to be synthesized; after replication, each double-stranded DNA retains the parental or “old” strand and one “new” strand. The dispersive model suggested that the two copies of the DNA would have segments of parental DNA and newly synthesized DNA. The Meselson and Stahl experiment supported the semiconservative model of replication, in which an entire replicated chromosome consists of one parental strand and one newly synthesized strand of DNA.

14.4 DNA Replication in Prokaryotes

Replication in prokaryotes starts from a sequence found on the chromosome called the origin of replication—the point at which the DNA opens up. Helicase opens up the DNA double helix, resulting in the formation of the replication fork. Single-strand binding proteins bind to the singlestranded DNA near the replication fork to keep the fork open. Primase synthesizes an RNA primer to initiate synthesis by DNA polymerase, which can add nucleotides only to the 3' end of a previously synthesized primer strand. Both new DNA strands grow according to their respective 5'-3' directions. One strand is synthesized continuously in the direction of the replication fork; this is called the leading strand. The other strand is synthesized in a direction away from the replication fork, in short stretches of DNA known as Okazaki fragments. This strand is known as the lagging strand. Once replication is completed, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA nucleotides and the DNA is sealed with DNA ligase, which creates phosphodiester bonds between the  of one end and the  phosphate of the other strand.

14.5 DNA Replication in Eukaryotes

Replication in eukaryotes starts at multiple origins of replication. The mechanism is quite similar to that in prokaryotes. A primer is required to initiate synthesis, which is then extended by DNA polymerase as it adds nucleotides one by one to the growing chain. The leading strand is synthesized continuously, whereas the lagging strand is synthesized in short stretches called Okazaki fragments. The RNA primers are replaced with DNA nucleotides; the DNA Okazaki fragments are linked into one continuous strand by DNA ligase. The ends of the chromosomes pose a problem as the primer RNA at the 5’ ends of the DNA cannot be replaced with DNA, and the chromosome is progressively shortened. Telomerase, an enzyme with an inbuilt RNA template, extends the ends by copying the RNA template and extending one strand of the chromosome. DNA polymerase can then fill in the complementary DNA strand using the regular replication enzymes. In this way, the ends of the chromosomes are protected.

14.6 DNA Repair

DNA polymerase can make mistakes while adding nucleotides. It edits the DNA by proofreading every newly added base. Incorrect bases are removed and replaced by the correct base before proceeding with elongation. Most mistakes are corrected during replication, although when this does not happen, the mismatch repair mechanism is employed. Mismatch repair enzymes recognize the wrongly incorporated base and excise it from the DNA, replacing it with the correct base. In yet another type of repair, nucleotide excision repair, a damaged base is removed along with a few bases on the  and  end, and these are replaced by copying the template with the help of DNA polymerase. The ends of the newly synthesized fragment are attached to the rest of the DNA using DNA ligase, which creates a phosphodiester bond.

Most mistakes are corrected, and if they are not, they may result in a mutation, defined as a permanent change in the DNA sequence. Mutations can be of many types, such as substitution, deletion, insertion, and trinucleotide repeat expansions. Mutations in repair genes may lead to serious consequences such as cancer. Mutations can be induced or may occur spontaneously.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 14.10 In eukaryotic cells, DNA and RNA synthesis occur in a separate compartment from protein synthesis. In prokaryotic cells, both processes occur together. What advantages might there be to separating the processes? What advantages might there be to having them occur together?

2. Figure 14.14 You isolate a cell strain in which the joining of Okazaki fragments is impaired and suspect that a mutation has occurred in an enzyme found at the replication fork. Which enzyme is most likely to be mutated?   
3. Figure 14.21 A frameshift mutation that results in the insertion of three nucleotides is often less deleterious than a mutation that results in the insertion of one nucleotide. Why?

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. If DNA of a particular species was analyzed and it was found that it contains 27 percent A, what would be the percentage of C?

a. 27 percent b. 30 percent c. 23 percent d. 54 percent

5. The experiments by Hershey and Chase helped confirm that DNA was the hereditary material on the basis of the finding that:

a. radioactive phage were found in the pellet b. radioactive cells were found in the supernatant c. radioactive sulfur was found inside the cell d. radioactive phosphorus was found in the cell

6. Bacterial transformation is a major concern in many medical settings. Why might health care providers be concerned?

a. Pathogenic bacteria could introduce diseasecausing genes in non-pathogenic bacteria.   
b. Antibiotic resistance genes could be introduced to new bacteria to create “superbugs.”   
c. Bacteriophages could spread DNA encoding toxins to new bacteria.   
d. All of the above.

7. DNA double helix does not have which of the following?

a. antiparallel configuration b. complementary base pairing c. major and minor grooves d. uracil

8. In eukaryotes, what is the DNA wrapped around?

a. single-stranded binding proteins   
b. sliding clamp   
c. polymerase   
d. histones

9. Meselson and Stahl's experiments proved that DNA replicates by which mode?

a. conservative b. semi-conservative c. dispersive d. none of the above

10. If the sequence of the  strand is AATGCTAC, then the complementary sequence has the following sequence:

a.  -AATGCTAC-  b.  -CATCGTAA-  c.  -TTACGATG-  d.  -GTAGCATT-5'

11. How did Meselson and Stahl support Watson and Crick’s double-helix model?

a. They demonstrated that each strand serves as a template for synthesizing a new strand of DNA.   
b. They showed that the DNA strands break and recombine without losing genetic material.   
c. They proved that DNA maintains a double-helix structure while undergoing semi-conservative replication.   
d. They demonstrated that conservative replication maintains the complementary base pairing of each DNA helix.

12. Which of the following components is not involved during the formation of the replication fork?

a. single-strand binding proteins   
b. helicase   
c. origin of replication   
d. ligase

13. Which of the following does the enzyme primase synthesize?

a. DNA primer   
b. RNA primer   
c. Okazaki fragments   
d. phosphodiester linkage

14. In which direction does DNA replication take place?

a. 5'-3' b. 3'-5' c. 5' d. 3'

15. A scientist randomly mutates the DNA of a bacterium. She then sequences the bacterium’s daughter cells, and finds that the daughters have many errors in their replicated DNA. The parent bacterium likely acquired a mutation in which enzyme?

a. DNA ligase b. DNA pol II c. Primase d. DNA pol I

16. The ends of the linear chromosomes are maintained by

a. helicase b. primase c. DNA pol d. telomerase

17. Which of the following is not a true statement comparing prokaryotic and eukaryotic DNA replication?

a. Both eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA polymerases build off RNA primers made by primase.   
b. Eukaryotic DNA replication requires multiple replication forks, while prokaryotic replication uses a single origin to rapidly replicate the entire genome.   
c. DNA replication always occurs in the nucleus.   
d. Eukaryotic DNA replication involves more polymerases than prokaryotic replication.

18. During proofreading, which of the following enzymes reads the DNA?

a. primase b. topoisomerase c. DNA pol d. helicase

19. The initial mechanism for repairing nucleotide errors in DNA is

a. mismatch repair   
b. DNA polymerase proofreading   
c. nucleotide excision repair   
d. thymine dimers

20. A scientist creates fruit fly larvae with a mutation that eliminates the exonuclease function of DNA pol III. Which prediction about the mutational load in the adult fruit flies is most likely to be correct? a. The adults with the DNA pol III mutation will have significantly more mutations than average. b. The adults with the DNA pol III mutation will have slightly more mutations than average. c. The adults with the DNA pol III mutation will have the same number of mutations as average. d. The adults with the DNA pol III mutation will have fewer mutations than average.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

21. Explain Griffith's transformation experiments. What did he conclude from them?

22. Why were radioactive sulfur and phosphorous used to label bacteriophage in Hershey and Chase's experiments?   
23. When Chargaff was performing his experiments, the tetranucleotide hypothesis, which stated that DNA was composed of GACT nucleotide repeats, was the most widely accepted view of DNA’s composition. How did Chargaff disprove this hypothesis?   
24. Provide a brief summary of the Sanger sequencing method.   
25. Describe the structure and complementary base pairing of DNA.   
26. Prokaryotes have a single circular chromosome while eukaryotes have linear chromosomes. Describe one advantage and one disadvantage to the eukaryotic genome packaging compared to the prokaryotes.   
27. How did the scientific community learn that DNA replication takes place in a semi-conservative fashion?   
28. Imagine the Meselson and Stahl experiments had supported conservative replication instead of semiconservative replication. What results would you predict to observe after two rounds of replication? Be specific regarding percent distributions of DNA incorporating  and  in the gradient.   
29. DNA replication is bidirectional and discontinuous; explain your understanding of those concepts.

30. What are Okazaki fragments and how they are formed?

31. If the rate of replication in a particular prokaryote is 900 nucleotides per second, how long would it take 1.2 million base pair genomes to make two copies?   
32. Explain the events taking place at the replication fork. If the gene for helicase is mutated, what part of replication will be affected?   
33. What is the role of a primer in DNA replication? What would happen if you forgot to add a primer in a tube containing the reaction mix for a DNA sequencing reaction?   
34. Quinolone antibiotics treat bacterial infections by blocking the activity of topoisomerase. Why does this treatment work? Explain what occurs at the molecular level.   
35. How do the linear chromosomes in eukaryotes ensure that its ends are replicated completely?   
36. What is the consequence of mutation of a mismatch repair enzyme? How will this affect the function of a gene?   
37. An adult with a history of tanning has his genome sequenced. The beginning of a protein-coding region of his DNA reads ATGGGGATATGGCAT. If the proteincoding region of a healthy adult reads ATGGGGATATGAGCAT, identify the site and type of mutation.