8.4 Molecular Orbital Theory

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Outline the basic quantum-mechanical approach to deriving molecular orbitals from atomic orbitals   
• Describe traits of bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals   
• Calculate bond orders based on molecular electron configurations   
• Write molecular electron configurations for first- and second-row diatomic molecules   
• Relate these electron configurations to the molecules’ stabilities and magnetic properties

For almost every covalent molecule that exists, we can now draw the Lewis structure, predict the electron-pair geometry, predict the molecular geometry, and come close to predicting bond angles. However, one of the most important molecules we know, the oxygen molecule  , presents a problem with respect to its Lewis structure. We would write the following Lewis structure for  :

· 0 :0=o:

This electronic structure adheres to all the rules governing Lewis theory. There is an  double bond, and each oxygen atom has eight electrons around it. However, this picture is at odds with the magnetic behavior of oxygen. By itself,  is not magnetic, but it is attracted to magnetic fields. Thus, when we pour liquid oxygen past a strong magnet, it collects between the poles of the magnet and defies gravity, as in Figure 8.1. Such attraction to a magnetic field is called paramagnetism, and it arises in molecules that have unpaired electrons. And yet, the Lewis structure of  indicates that all electrons are paired. How do we account for this discrepancy?

Magnetic susceptibility measures the force experienced by a substance in a magnetic field. When we compare the weight of a sample to the weight measured in a magnetic field (Figure 8.27), paramagnetic samples that are attracted to the magnet will appear heavier because of the force exerted by the magnetic field. We can calculate the number of unpaired electrons based on the increase in weight.

Experiments show that each  molecule has two unpaired electrons. The Lewis-structure model does not predict the presence of these two unpaired electrons. Unlike oxygen, the apparent weight of most molecules decreases slightly in the presence of an inhomogeneous magnetic field. Materials in which all of the electrons are paired are diamagnetic and weakly repel a magnetic field. Paramagnetic and diamagnetic materials do not act as permanent magnets. Only in the presence of an applied magnetic field do they demonstrate attraction or repulsion.

LINK TO LEARNING

Water, like most molecules, contains all paired electrons. Living things contain a large percentage of water, so they demonstrate diamagnetic behavior. If you place a frog near a sufficiently large magnet, it will levitate. You can see videos (http://openstax.org/l/16diamagnetic) of diamagnetic floating frogs, strawberries, and more.

Molecular orbital theory (MO theory) provides an explanation of chemical bonding that accounts for the paramagnetism of the oxygen molecule. It also explains the bonding in a number of other molecules, such as violations of the octet rule and more molecules with more complicated bonding (beyond the scope of this text) that are difficult to describe with Lewis structures. Additionally, it provides a model for describing the energies of electrons in a molecule and the probable location of these electrons. Unlike valence bond theory, which uses hybrid orbitals that are assigned to one specific atom, MO theory uses the combination of atomic orbitals to yield molecular orbitals that are delocalizedover the entire molecule rather than being localized on its constituent atoms. MO theory also helps us understand why some substances are electrical conductors, others are semiconductors, and still others are insulators. Table 8.2 summarizes the main points of the two complementary bonding theories. Both theories provide different, useful ways of describing molecular structure.

Comparison of Bonding Theories

Molecular orbital theory describes the distribution of electrons in molecules in much the same way that the distribution of electrons in atoms is described using atomic orbitals. Using quantum mechanics, the behavior of an electron in a molecule is still described by a wave function,  , analogous to the behavior in an atom. Just like electrons around isolated atoms, electrons around atoms in molecules are limited to discrete (quantized) energies. The region of space in which a valence electron in a molecule is likely to be found is called a molecular orbital  . Like an atomic orbital, a molecular orbital is full when it contains two electrons with opposite spin.

We will consider the molecular orbitals in molecules composed of two identical atoms (  or  , for example). Such molecules are called homonuclear diatomic molecules. In these diatomic molecules, several types of molecular orbitals occur.

The mathematical process of combining atomic orbitals to generate molecular orbitals is called the linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO). The wave function describes the wavelike properties of an electron. Molecular orbitals are combinations of atomic orbital wave functions. Combining waves can lead to constructive interference, in which peaks line up with peaks, or destructive interference, in which peaks line up with troughs (Figure 8.28). In orbitals, the waves are three dimensional, and they combine with in-phase waves producing regions with a higher probability of electron density and out-of-phase waves producing nodes, or regions of no electron density.

There are two types of molecular orbitals that can form from the overlap of two atomic  orbitals on adjacent atoms. The two types are illustrated in Figure 8.29. The in-phase combination produces a lower energy  molecular orbital (read as "sigma-s") in which most of the electron density is directly between the nuclei. The out-of-phase addition (which can also be thought of as subtracting the wave functions) produces a higher energy  molecular orbital (read as "sigma-s-star") molecular orbital in which there is a node between the nuclei. The asterisk signifies that the orbital is an antibonding orbital. Electrons in a  orbital are attracted by both nuclei at the same time and are more stable (of lower energy) than they would be in the isolated atoms. Adding electrons to these orbitals creates a force that holds the two nuclei together, so we call these orbitals bonding orbitals. Electrons in the  orbitals are located well away from the region between the two nuclei. The attractive force between the nuclei and these electrons pulls the two nuclei apart. Hence, these orbitals are called antibonding orbitals. Electrons fill the lower-energy bonding orbital before the higher-energy antibonding orbital, just as they fill lower-energy atomic orbitals before they fill higher-energy atomic orbitals.

LINK TO LEARNING

You can watch animations (http://openstax.org/l/16molecorbital) visualizing the calculated atomic orbitals combining to form various molecular orbitals at the Orbitron website.

In  orbitals, the wave function gives rise to two lobes with opposite phases, analogous to how a twodimensional wave has both parts above and below the average. We indicate the phases by shading the orbital lobes different colors. When orbital lobes of the same phase overlap, constructive wave interference increases the electron density. When regions of opposite phase overlap, the destructive wave interference decreases electron density and creates nodes. When  orbitals overlap end to end, they create σ and  orbitals (Figure 8.30). If two atoms are located along the  -axis in a Cartesian coordinate system, the two  orbitals overlap end to end and form  (bonding) and  (antibonding) (read as "sigma-p-x" and "sigma-p-x star," respectively). Just as with  -orbital overlap, the asterisk indicates the orbital with a node between the nuclei, which is a higher-energy, antibonding orbital.

The side-by-side overlap of two  orbitals gives rise to a pi  bonding molecular orbital and a  antibonding molecular orbital, as shown in Figure 8.31. In valence bond theory, we describe π bonds as containing a nodal plane containing the internuclear axis and perpendicular to the lobes of the  orbitals, with electron density on either side of the node. In molecular orbital theory, we describe the π orbital by this same shape, and a π bond exists when this orbital contains electrons. Electrons in this orbital interact with both nuclei and help hold the two atoms together, making it a bonding orbital. For the out-of-phase combination, there are two nodal planes created, one along the internuclear axis and a perpendicular one between the nuclei.

In the molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules, each atom also has two sets of  orbitals oriented side by side  , so these four atomic orbitals combine pairwise to create two π orbitals and two  orbitals. The  and  orbitals are oriented at right angles to the  and  orbitals. Except for their orientation, the  and  orbitals are identical and have the same energy; they are degenerate orbitals. The  and  antibonding orbitals are also degenerate and identical except for their orientation. A total of six molecular orbitals results from the combination of the six atomic  orbitals in two atoms:  and   and  and 

EXAMPLE 8.5

Molecular Orbitals

Predict what type (if any) of molecular orbital would result from adding the wave functions so each pair of orbitals shown overlap. The orbitals are all similar in energy.

Solution

(a) is an in-phase combination, resulting in a  orbital

(b) will not result in a new orbital because the in-phase component (bottom) and out-of-phase component (top) cancel out. Only orbitals with the correct alignment can combine.

(c) is an out-of-phase combination, resulting in a  orbital.

Check Your Learning

Label the molecular orbital shown as  or π, bonding or antibonding and indicate where the node occurs.

Answer:

The orbital is located along the internuclear axis, so it is a σ orbital. There is a node bisecting the internuclear axis, so it is an antibonding orbital.

Portrait of a Chemist

Walter Kohn: Nobel Laureate

Walter Kohn (Figure 8.32) is a theoretical physicist who studies the electronic structure of solids. His work combines the principles of quantum mechanics with advanced mathematical techniques. This technique, called density functional theory, makes it possible to compute properties of molecular orbitals, including their shape and energies. Kohn and mathematician John Pople were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1998 for their contributions to our understanding of electronic structure. Kohn also made significant contributions to the physics of semiconductors.

Kohn’s biography has been remarkable outside the realm of physical chemistry as well. He was born in Austria, and during World War II he was part of the Kindertransport program that rescued 10,000 children from the Nazi regime. His summer jobs included discovering gold deposits in Canada and helping Polaroid explain how its instant film worked. Dr. Kohn passed away in 2016 at the age of 93.

HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT

Computational Chemistry in Drug Design

While the descriptions of bonding described in this chapter involve many theoretical concepts, they also have many practical, real-world applications. For example, drug design is an important field that uses our understanding of chemical bonding to develop pharmaceuticals. This interdisciplinary area of study uses biology (understanding diseases and how they operate) to identify specific targets, such as a binding site that is involved in a disease pathway. By modeling the structures of the binding site and potential drugs, computational chemists can predict which structures can fit together and how effectively they will bind (see Figure 8.33). Thousands of potential candidates can be narrowed down to a few of the most promising candidates. These candidate molecules are then carefully tested to determine side effects, how effectively they can be transported through the body, and other factors. Dozens of important new pharmaceuticals have been discovered with the aid of computational chemistry, and new research projects are underway.

Molecular Orbital Energy Diagrams

The relative energy levels of atomic and molecular orbitals are typically shown in a molecular orbital diagram (Figure 8.34). For a diatomic molecule, the atomic orbitals of one atom are shown on the left, and those of the other atom are shown on the right. Each horizontal line represents one orbital that can hold two electrons. The molecular orbitals formed by the combination of the atomic orbitals are shown in the center. Dashed lines show which of the atomic orbitals combine to form the molecular orbitals. For each pair of atomic orbitals that combine, one lower-energy (bonding) molecular orbital and one higher-energy (antibonding) orbital result. Thus we can see that combining the six  atomic orbitals results in three bonding orbitals (one σ and two π) and three antibonding orbitals (one  and two  ).

We predict the distribution of electrons in these molecular orbitals by filling the orbitals in the same way that we fill atomic orbitals, by the Aufbau principle. Lower-energy orbitals fill first, electrons spread out among degenerate orbitals before pairing, and each orbital can hold a maximum of two electrons with opposite spins (Figure 8.34). Just as we write electron configurations for atoms, we can write the molecular electronic configuration by listing the orbitals with superscripts indicating the number of electrons present. For clarity, we place parentheses around molecular orbitals with the same energy. In this case, each orbital is at a different energy, so parentheses separate each orbital. Thus we would expect a diatomic molecule or ion containing seven electrons (such as  would have the molecular electron configuration  It is common to omit the core electrons from molecular orbital diagrams and configurations and include only the valence electrons.

Bond Order

The filled molecular orbital diagram shows the number of electrons in both bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals. The net contribution of the electrons to the bond strength of a molecule is identified by determining the bond order that results from the filling of the molecular orbitals by electrons.

When using Lewis structures to describe the distribution of electrons in molecules, we define bond order as the number of bonding pairs of electrons between two atoms. Thus a single bond has a bond order of 1, a double bond has a bond order of 2, and a triple bond has a bond order of 3. We define bond order differently when we use the molecular orbital description of the distribution of electrons, but the resulting bond order is usually the same. The MO technique is more accurate and can handle cases when the Lewis structure method fails, but both methods describe the same phenomenon.

In the molecular orbital model, an electron contributes to a bonding interaction if it occupies a bonding orbital and it contributes to an antibonding interaction if it occupies an antibonding orbital. The bond order is calculated by subtracting the destabilizing (antibonding) electrons from the stabilizing (bonding) electrons. Since a bond consists of two electrons, we divide by two to get the bond order. We can determine bond order with the following equation:

The order of a covalent bond is a guide to its strength; a bond between two given atoms becomes stronger as the bond order increases (Table 8.1). If the distribution of electrons in the molecular orbitals between two atoms is such that the resulting bond would have a bond order of zero, a stable bond does not form. We next look at some specific examples of MO diagrams and bond orders.

Bonding in Diatomic Molecules

A dihydrogen molecule  forms from two hydrogen atoms. When the atomic orbitals of the two atoms combine, the electrons occupy the molecular orbital of lowest energy, the  bonding orbital. A dihydrogen molecule,  , readily forms because the energy of a  molecule is lower than that of two H atoms. The  orbital that contains both electrons is lower in energy than either of the two  atomic orbitals.

A molecular orbital can hold two electrons, so both electrons in the  molecule are in the  bonding orbital; the electron configuration is  We represent this configuration by a molecular orbital energy diagram (Figure 8.35) in which a single upward arrow indicates one electron in an orbital, and two (upward and downward) arrows indicate two electrons of opposite spin.

A dihydrogen molecule contains two bonding electrons and no antibonding electrons so we have

Because the bond order for the  bond is equal to 1, the bond is a single bond.

A helium atom has two electrons, both of which are in its  orbital. Two helium atoms do not combine to form a dihelium molecule,  , with four electrons, because the stabilizing effect of the two electrons in the lowerenergy bonding orbital would be offset by the destabilizing effect of the two electrons in the higher-energy antibonding molecular orbital. We would write the hypothetical electron configuration of  as  as in Figure 8.36. The net energy change would be zero, so there is no driving force for helium atoms to form the diatomic molecule. In fact, helium exists as discrete atoms rather than as diatomic molecules. The bond order in a hypothetical dihelium molecule would be zero.

A bond order of zero indicates that no bond is formed between two atoms.

The Diatomic Molecules of the Second Period

Eight possible homonuclear diatomic molecules might be formed by the atoms of the second period of the periodic table: Li2,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  , and  . However, we can predict that the  molecule and the  molecule would not be stable. We can see this by a consideration of the molecular electron configurations (Table 8.3).

We predict valence molecular orbital electron configurations just as we predict electron configurations of atoms. Valence electrons are assigned to valence molecular orbitals with the lowest possible energies.

Consistent with Hund’s rule, whenever there are two or more degenerate molecular orbitals, electrons fill each orbital of that type singly before any pairing of electrons takes place.

As we saw in valence bond theory, σ bonds are generally more stable than π bonds formed from degenerate atomic orbitals. Similarly, in molecular orbital theory,  orbitals are usually more stable than π orbitals. However, this is not always the case. The MOs for the valence orbitals of the second period are shown in Figure 8.37. Looking at  molecular orbitals, we see that the order is consistent with the generic diagram shown in the previous section. However, for atoms with three or fewer electrons in the  orbitals (Li through N) we observe a different pattern, in which the  orbital is higher in energy than the  set. Obtain the molecular orbital diagram for a homonuclear diatomic ion by adding or subtracting electrons from the diagram for the neutral molecule.

This switch in orbital ordering occurs because of a phenomenon called s-p mixing. s-p mixing does not create new orbitals; it merely influences the energies of the existing molecular orbitals. The  wavefunction mathematically combines with the  wavefunction, with the result that the  orbital becomes more stable, and the  orbital becomes less stable (Figure 8.38). Similarly, the antibonding orbitals also undergo s-p mixing, with the  becoming more stable and the  becoming less stable.

s-p mixing occurs when the  and  orbitals have similar energies. The energy difference between  and  orbitals in O, F, and Ne is greater than that in Li, Be, B, C, and N. Because of this,  , and  exhibit negligible s-p mixing (not sufficient to change the energy ordering), and their MO diagrams follow the normal pattern, as shown in Figure 8.37. All of the other period 2 diatomic molecules do have s-p mixing, which leads to the pattern where the  orbital is raised above the  set.

Using the MO diagrams shown in Figure 8.37, we can add in the electrons and determine the molecular electron configuration and bond order for each of the diatomic molecules. As shown in Table 8.3,  and  molecules would have a bond order of 0, and these molecules do not exist.

The combination of two lithium atoms to form a lithium molecule,  , is analogous to the formation of  , but the atomic orbitals involved are the valence  orbitals. Each of the two lithium atoms has one valence electron. Hence, we have two valence electrons available for the  bonding molecular orbital. Because both valence electrons would be in a bonding orbital, we would predict the  molecule to be stable. The molecule is, in fact, present in appreciable concentration in lithium vapor at temperatures near the boiling point of the element. All of the other molecules in Table 8.3 with a bond order greater than zero are also known.

The  molecule has enough electrons to half fill the  level. We expect the two electrons that occupy these two degenerate orbitals to be unpaired, and this molecular electronic configuration for  is in accord with the fact that the oxygen molecule has two unpaired electrons (Figure 8.40). The presence of two unpaired electrons has proved to be difficult to explain using Lewis structures, but the molecular orbital theory explains it quite well. In fact, the unpaired electrons of the oxygen molecule provide a strong piece of support for the molecular orbital theory.

HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT

Band Theory

When two identical atomic orbitals on different atoms combine, two molecular orbitals result (see Figure 8.29). The bonding orbital is lower in energy than the original atomic orbitals because the atomic orbitals are inphase in the molecular orbital. The antibonding orbital is higher in energy than the original atomic orbitals because the atomic orbitals are out-of-phase.

In a solid, similar things happen, but on a much larger scale. Remember that even in a small sample there are a huge number of atoms (typically  atoms), and therefore a huge number of atomic orbitals that may be combined into molecular orbitals. When  valence atomic orbitals, all of the same energy and each containing one (1) electron, are combined,  (filled) bonding orbitals and  (empty) antibonding orbitals will result. Each bonding orbital will show an energy lowering as the atomic orbitals are mostlyin-phase, but each of the bonding orbitals will be a little different and have slightly different energies. The antibonding orbitals will show an increase in energy as the atomic orbitals are mostlyout-of-phase, but each of the antibonding orbitals will also be a little different and have slightly different energies. The allowed energy levels for all the bonding orbitals are so close together that they form a band, called the valence band. Likewise, all the antibonding orbitals are very close together and form a band, called the conduction band. Figure 8.39 shows the bands for three important classes of materials: insulators, semiconductors, and conductors.

In order to conduct electricity, electrons must move from the filled valence band to the empty conduction band where they can move throughout the solid. The size of the band gap, or the energy difference between the top of the valence band and the bottom of the conduction band, determines how easy it is to move electrons between the bands. Only a small amount of energy is required in a conductor because the band gap is very small. This small energy difference is “easy” to overcome, so they are good conductors of electricity. In an insulator, the band gap is so “large” that very few electrons move into the conduction band; as a result, insulators are poor conductors of electricity. Semiconductors conduct electricity when “moderate” amounts of energy are provided to move electrons out of the valence band and into the conduction band. Semiconductors, such as silicon, are found in many electronics.

Semiconductors are used in devices such as computers, smartphones, and solar cells. Solar cells produce electricity when light provides the energy to move electrons out of the valence band. The electricity that is generated may then be used to power a light or tool, or it can be stored for later use by charging a battery. As of December 2014, up to  of the energy in sunlight could be converted into electricity using solar cells.

EXAMPLE 8.6

Molecular Orbital Diagrams, Bond Order, and Number of Unpaired Electrons

Draw the molecular orbital diagram for the oxygen molecule,  . From this diagram, calculate the bond order for  . How does this diagram account for the paramagnetism of  ?

Solution

We draw a molecular orbital energy diagram similar to that shown in Figure 8.37. Each oxygen atom contributes six electrons, so the diagram appears as shown in Figure 8.40.

We calculate the bond order as

Oxygen's paramagnetism is explained by the presence of two unpaired electrons in the  molecular orbitals.

Check Your Learning

The main component of air is  . From the molecular orbital diagram of  , predict its bond order and whether it is diamagnetic or paramagnetic.

Answer:

 has a bond order of 3 and is diamagnetic.

EXAMPLE 8.7

Ion Predictions with MO Diagrams

Give the molecular orbital configuration for the valence electrons in  Will this ion be stable?

Solution

Looking at the appropriate MO diagram, we see that the π orbitals are lower in energy than the  orbital. The valence electron configuration for  is  Adding two more electrons to generate the  anion will give a valence electron configuration of  Since this has six more bonding electrons than antibonding, the bond order will be 3, and the ion should be stable.

Check Your Learning

How many unpaired electrons would be present on a  ion? Would it be paramagnetic or diamagnetic?

Answer: two, paramagnetic

LINK TO LEARNING

Creating molecular orbital diagrams for molecules with more than two atoms relies on the same basic ideas as the diatomic examples presented here. However, with more atoms, computers are required to calculate how the atomic orbitals combine. See three-dimensional drawings (http://openstax.org/l/16orbitaldiag) of the molecular orbitals for  .

Key Terms

antibonding orbital molecular orbital located outside of the region between two nuclei; electrons in an antibonding orbital destabilize the molecule   
bond order number of pairs of electrons between two atoms; it can be found by the number of bonds in a Lewis structure or by the difference between the number of bonding and antibonding electrons divided by two   
bonding orbital molecular orbital located between two nuclei; electrons in a bonding orbital stabilize a molecule   
degenerate orbitals orbitals that have the same energy   
diamagnetism phenomenon in which a material is not magnetic itself but is repelled by a magnetic field; it occurs when there are only paired electrons present   
homonuclear diatomic molecule molecule consisting of two identical atoms   
hybrid orbital orbital created by combining atomic orbitals on a central atom   
hybridization model that describes the changes in the atomic orbitals of an atom when it forms a covalent compound   
linear combination of atomic orbitals technique for combining atomic orbitals to create molecular orbitals   
molecular orbital region of space in which an electron has a high probability of being found in a molecule   
molecular orbital diagram visual representation of the relative energy levels of molecular orbitals   
molecular orbital theory model that describes the behavior of electrons delocalized throughout a molecule in terms of the combination of atomic wave functions   
node plane separating different lobes of orbitals, where the probability of finding an electron is zero   
overlap coexistence of orbitals from two different atoms sharing the same region of space, leading to the formation of a covalent bond   
paramagnetism phenomenon in which a material is not magnetic itself but is attracted to a magnetic field; it occurs when there are unpaired electrons present   
pi bond (π bond) covalent bond formed by side-byside overlap of atomic orbitals; the electron density is found on opposite sides of the internuclear axis   
s-p mixing change that causes  orbitals to be less stable than  orbitals due to the mixing of  and  -based molecular orbitals of similar energies.   
sigma bond (σ bond) covalent bond formed by overlap of atomic orbitals along the internuclear axis   
sphybrid orbital one of a set of two orbitals with a linear arrangement that results from combining one  and one  orbital   
 hybrid orbital one of a set of three orbitals with a trigonal planar arrangement that results from combining one  and two  orbitals   
 hybrid orbital one of a set of four orbitals with a tetrahedral arrangement that results from combining one  and three  orbitals   
 hybrid orbital one of a set of five orbitals with a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement that results from combining one  , three  , and one  orbital   
 hybrid orbital one of a set of six orbitals with an octahedral arrangement that results from combining one  , three  , and two  orbitals   
valence bond theory description of bonding that involves atomic orbitals overlapping to form σ or π bonds, within which pairs of electrons are shared   
π bonding orbital molecular orbital formed by side-by-side overlap of atomic orbitals, in which the electron density is found on opposite sides of the internuclear axis   
 bonding orbital antibonding molecular orbital formed by out of phase side-by-side overlap of atomic orbitals, in which the electron density is found on both sides of the internuclear axis, and there is a node between the nuclei   
σ bonding orbital molecular orbital in which the electron density is found along the axis of the bond   
 bonding orbital antibonding molecular orbital formed by out-of-phase overlap of atomic orbital along the axis of the bond, generating a node between the nuclei

Key Equations

bond order  (number of bonding electron)-(number of antibonding electrons) 2

Summary

8.1 Valence Bond Theory

Valence bond theory describes bonding as a consequence of the overlap of two separate atomic orbitals on different atoms that creates a region with one pair of electrons shared between the two atoms. When the orbitals overlap along an axis containing the nuclei, they form a σ bond. When they overlap in a fashion that creates a node along this axis, they form a π bond.

8.2 Hybrid Atomic Orbitals

We can use hybrid orbitals, which are mathematical combinations of some or all of the valence atomic orbitals, to describe the electron density around covalently bonded atoms. These hybrid orbitals either form sigma (σ) bonds directed toward other atoms of the molecule or contain lone pairs of electrons. We can determine the type of hybridization around a central atom from the geometry of the regions of electron density about it. Two such regions imply sphybridization; three,  hybridization; four,  hybridization; five,  hybridization; and six,  hybridization. Pi (π) bonds are formed from unhybridized atomic orbitals  or  orbitals).

8.3 Multiple Bonds

Multiple bonds consist of a σ bond located along the axis between two atoms and one or two π bonds. The σ bonds are usually formed by the overlap of hybridized atomic orbitals, while the π bonds are formed by the side-by-side overlap of unhybridized orbitals. Resonance occurs when there are multiple unhybridized orbitals with the appropriate alignment to overlap, so the placement of π bonds can vary.

8.4 Molecular Orbital Theory

Molecular orbital (MO) theory describes the behavior of electrons in a molecule in terms of combinations of the atomic wave functions. The resulting molecular orbitals may extend over all the atoms in the molecule. Bonding molecular orbitals are formed by in-phase combinations of atomic wave functions, and electrons in these orbitals stabilize a molecule. Antibonding molecular orbitals result from out-of-phase combinations of atomic wave functions and electrons in these orbitals make a molecule less stable. Molecular orbitals located along an internuclear axis are called σ MOs. They can be formed from  orbitals or from  orbitals oriented in an end-to-end fashion. Molecular orbitals formed from  orbitals oriented in a sideby-side fashion have electron density on opposite sides of the internuclear axis and are called π orbitals.

We can describe the electronic structure of diatomic molecules by applying molecular orbital theory to the valence electrons of the atoms. Electrons fill molecular orbitals following the same rules that apply to filling atomic orbitals; Hund’s rule and the Aufbau principle tell us that lower-energy orbitals will fill first, electrons will spread out before they pair up, and each orbital can hold a maximum of two electrons with opposite spins. Materials with unpaired electrons are paramagnetic and attracted to a magnetic field, while those with all-paired electrons are diamagnetic and repelled by a magnetic field. Correctly predicting the magnetic properties of molecules is in advantage of molecular orbital theory over Lewis structures and valence bond theory.

Exercises

8.1 Valence Bond Theory

1. Explain how σ and π bonds are similar and how they are different.   
2. Draw a curve that describes the energy of a system with  and Cl atoms at varying distances. Then, find the minimum energy of this curve two ways. (a) Use the bond energy found in Table 8.1 to calculate the energy for one single HCl bond (Hint: How many bonds are in a mole?) (b) Use the enthalpy of reaction and the bond energies for  and  to solve for the energy of one mole of HCl bonds.    
3. Explain why bonds occur at specific average bond distances instead of the atoms approaching each other infinitely close.

4. Use valence bond theory to explain the bonding in  , HF, and ClBr. Sketch the overlap of the atomic orbitals involved in the bonds.

5. Use valence bond theory to explain the bonding in  . Sketch the overlap of the atomic orbitals involved in the bonds in  .

6. How many σ and π bonds are present in the molecule HCN?

7. A friend tells you  has three π bonds due to overlap of the three  -orbitals on each N atom. Do you agree?   
8. Draw the Lewis structures for  and CO, and predict the number of σ and π bonds for each molecule. (a)  (b) CO

8.2 Hybrid Atomic Orbitals

9. Why is the concept of hybridization required in valence bond theory?

10. Give the shape that describes each hybrid orbital set: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

11. Explain why a carbon atom cannot form five bonds using  hybrid orbitals.

12. What is the hybridization of the central atom in each of the following?

(a)  (b)  (c) (d) 

13. A molecule with the formula  could have one of four different shapes. Give the shape and the hybridization of the central A atom for each.

14. Methionine,  is an amino acid found in proteins. The Lewis structure of this compound is shown below. What is the hybridization type of each carbon, oxygen, the nitrogen, and the sulfur?

15. Sulfuric acid is manufactured by a series of reactions represented by the following equations:    Draw a Lewis structure, predict the molecular geometry by VSEPR, and determine the hybridization of sulfur for the following: (a) circular  molecule (b)  molecule (c)  molecule (d)  molecule (the hydrogen atoms are bonded to oxygen atoms)

16. Two important industrial chemicals, ethene,  , and propene,  , are produced by the steam (or thermal) cracking process: 

For each of the four carbon compounds, do the following:

(a) Draw a Lewis structure.   
(b) Predict the geometry about the carbon atom.   
(c) Determine the hybridization of each type of carbon atom.

17. Analysis of a compound indicates that it contains  Xe and  F by mass.

(a) What is the empirical formula for this compound? (As umethisisalsothemolecularformulain respondingtotheremainingpartsofthisexercise).   
(b) Write a Lewis structure for the compound.   
(c) Predict the shape of the molecules of the compound.   
(d) What hybridization is consistent with the shape you predicted?

18. Consider nitrous acid,  (HONO).

(a) Write a Lewis structure.   
(b) What are the electron pair and molecular geometries of the internal oxygen and nitrogen atoms in the  molecule?   
(c) What is the hybridization on the internal oxygen and nitrogen atoms in  ?

19. Strike-anywhere matches contain a layer of  and a layer of  . The heat produced by the friction of striking the match causes these two compounds to react vigorously, which sets fire to the wooden stem of the match.  contains the  ion.  is an unusual molecule with the skeletal structure.

(a) Write Lewis structures for  and the  ion.   
(b) Describe the geometry about the  atoms, the S atom, and the Cl atom in these species.   
(c) Assign a hybridization to the  atoms, the S atom, and the Cl atom in these species.   
(d) Determine the oxidation states and formal charge of the atoms in  and the  ion.

20. Identify the hybridization of each carbon atom in the following molecule. (The arrangement of atoms is given; you need to determine how many bonds connect each pair of atoms.)

21. Write Lewis structures for  and  . On the basis of hybrid orbitals, explain the fact that  ,  , and  are stable molecules, but  does not exist.

22. In addition to  , two other fluoro derivatives of nitrogen are known:  and  . What shapes do you predict for these two molecules? What is the hybridization for the nitrogen in each molecule?

8.3 Multiple Bonds

23. The bond energy of a  single bond averages  ; that of a  triple bond averages   . Explain why the triple bond is not three times as strong as a single bond.

24. For the carbonate ion,  draw all of the resonance structures. Identify which orbitals overlap to create each bond.

25. A useful solvent that will dissolve salts as well as organic compounds is the compound acetonitrile,  It is present in paint strippers. (a) Write the Lewis structure for acetonitrile, and indicate the direction of the dipole moment in the molecule. (b) Identify the hybrid orbitals used by the carbon atoms in the molecule to form σ bonds. (c) Describe the atomic orbitals that form the π bonds in the molecule. Note that it is not necessary to hybridize the nitrogen atom.

26. For the molecule allene,  give the hybridization of each carbon atom. Will the hydrogen atoms be in the same plane or perpendicular planes?

27. Identify the hybridization of the central atom in each of the following molecules and ions that contain multiple bonds: (a) ClNO (N is the central atom) (b)  (c)  (C is the central atom) (d)  (S is the central atom) (e)  (S is the central atom) (f )  (Xe is the central atom) (g)  (Cl is the central atom)

28. Describe the molecular geometry and hybridization of the N, P, or S atoms in each of the following compounds. (a)  , phosphoric acid, used in cola soft drinks (b)  , ammonium nitrate, a fertilizer and explosive (c)  , disulfur dichloride, used in vulcanizing rubber (d)  , potassium pyrophosphate, an ingredient in some toothpastes

29. For each of the following molecules, indicate the hybridization requested and whether or not the electrons will be delocalized: (a) ozone  central O hybridization (b) carbon dioxide  central C hybridization (c) nitrogen dioxide  central N hybridization (d) phosphate ion  central P hybridization

30. For each of the following structures, determine the hybridization requested and whether the electrons wil be delocalized:

(a) Hybridization of each carbon (b) Hybridization of sulfur

(c) All atoms

31. Draw the orbital diagram for carbon in  showing how many carbon atom electrons are in each orbital.

8.4 Molecular Orbital Theory

32. Sketch the distribution of electron density in the bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals formed from two  orbitals and from two  orbitals.

33. How are the following similar, and how do they differ?

(a) σ molecular orbitals and π molecular orbitals (b)  for an atomic orbital and  for a molecular orbital (c) bonding orbitals and antibonding orbitals

34. If molecular orbitals are created by combining five atomic orbitals from atom A and five atomic orbitals from atom B combine, how many molecular orbitals will result?

35. Can a molecule with an odd number of electrons ever be diamagnetic? Explain why or why not.

36. Can a molecule with an even number of electrons ever be paramagnetic? Explain why or why no

37. Why are bonding molecular orbitals lower in energy than the parent atomic orbitals?

38. Calculate the bond order for an ion with this configuration: 

39. Explain why an electron in the bonding molecular orbital in the  molecule has a lower energy than an electron in the  atomic orbital of either of the separated hydrogen atoms.

40. Predict the valence electron molecular orbital configurations for the following, and state whether they wil be stable or unstable ions.

(a)  (b) (c)   (e)  (f )  (g)  (h)

41. Determine the bond order of each member of the following groups, and determine which member of each group is predicted by the molecular orbital model to have the strongest bond. (a)  ,   (b)  ,   (c)  ,  ，  (d)  ，  (e)  , 

42. For the first ionization energy for an  molecule, what molecular orbital is the electron removed from?

43. Compare the atomic and molecular orbital diagrams to identify the member of each of the following pairs that has the highest first ionization energy (the most tightly bound electron) in the gas phase:

(a) H and  (b) N and  (c) O and  (d) C and  (e) B and 

44. Which of the period 2 homonuclear diatomic molecules are predicted to be paramagnetic?

45. A friend tells you that the  orbital for fluorine starts off at a much lower energy than the  orbital for lithium, so the resulting  molecular orbital in  is more stable than in Li2. Do you agree?

46. True or false: Boron contains  valence electrons, so only one  orbital is needed to form molecular orbitals.

47. What charge would be needed on  to generate an ion with a bond order of 2?

48. Predict whether the MO diagram for  would show s-p mixing or not.

49. Explain why  is diamagnetic, while  which has the same number of valence electrons, is paramagnetic.

50. Using the MO diagrams, predict the bond order for the stronger bond in each pair: