17.1 Review of Redox Chemistry

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe defining traits of redox chemistry   
• Identify the oxidant and reductant of a redox reaction   
• Balance chemical equations for redox reactions using the half-reaction method

Since reactions involving electron transfer are essential to the topic of electrochemistry, a brief review of redox chemistry is provided here that summarizes and extends the content of an earlier text chapter (see chapter on reaction stoichiometry). Readers wishing additional review are referred to the text chapter on reaction stoichiometry.

Oxidation Numbers

By definition, a redox reaction is one that entails changes in oxidationnumber(or oxidationstate) for one or more of the elements involved. The oxidation number of an element in a compound is essentially an assessment of how the electronic environment of its atoms is different in comparison to atoms of the pure element. By this description, theoxidationnumberofanatominanelementisequaltozero. For an atom in a compound,theoxidationnumberisequaltothechargetheatomwouldhaveinthecompoundifthe compoundwereionic. Consequential to these rules, thesumofoxidationnumbersforal atomsinamolecule isequaltothechargeonthemolecule. To illustrate this formalism, examples from the two compound classes, ionic and covalent, will be considered.

Simple ionic compounds present the simplest examples to illustrate this formalism, since by definition the elements’ oxidation numbers are numerically equivalent to ionic charges. Sodium chloride, NaCl, is comprised of  cations and  anions, and so oxidation numbers for sodium and chlorine are,  and  , respectively. Calcium fluoride,  , is comprised of  cations and  anions, and so oxidation numbers for calcium and fluorine are,  and  , respectively.

Covalent compounds require a more challenging use of the formalism. Water is a covalent compound whose molecules consist of two H atoms bonded separately to a central O atom via polar covalent  bonds. The shared electrons comprising an  bond are more strongly attracted to the more electronegative O atom, and so it acquires a partial negative charge in the water molecule (relative to an O atom in elemental oxygen). Consequently, H atoms in a water molecule exhibit partial positive charges compared to H atoms in elemental hydrogen. The sum of the partial negative and partial positive charges for each water molecule is zero, and the water molecule is neutral.

Imagine that the polarization of shared electrons within the  bonds of water were  complete—the result would be transferof electrons from H to O, and water would be an ionic compound comprised of  anions and  cations. And so, the oxidations numbers for oxygen and hydrogen in water are  and  , respectively. Applying this same logic to carbon tetrachloride,  , yields oxidation numbers of  for carbon and  for chlorine. In the nitrate ion,  , the oxidation number for nitrogen is  and that for oxygen is  , summing to equal the  charge on the molecule:

Balancing Redox Equations

The unbalanced equation below describes the decomposition of molten sodium chloride:

unbalanced

This reaction satisfies the criterion for redox classification, since the oxidation number for Na is decreased from  to 0 (it undergoes reduction) and that for Cl is increased from  to 0 (it undergoes oxidation). The equation in this case is easily balanced by inspection, requiring stoichiometric coefficients of 2 for the NaCl and Na:

balanced

Redox reactions that take place in aqueous solutions are commonly encountered in electrochemistry, and many involve water or its characteristic ions,  and  , as reactants or products. In these cases, equations representing the redox reaction can be very challenging to balance by inspection, and the use of a systematic approach called the half-reactionmethodis helpful. This approach involves the following steps:

1. Write skeletal equations for the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.   
2. Balance each half-reaction for all elements except  and O.   
3. Balance each half-reaction for O by adding  .   
4. Balance each half-reaction for H by adding  .   
5. Balance each half-reaction for charge by adding electrons.   
6. If necessary, multiply one or both half-reactions so that the number of electrons consumed in one is equal   
to the number produced in the other.   
7. Add the two half-reactions and simplify.   
8. If the reaction takes place in a basic medium, add  ions the equation obtained in step 7 to neutralize   
the  ions (add in equal numbers to both sides of the equation) and simplify.

The examples below demonstrate the application of this method to balancing equations for aqueous redox reactions.

EXAMPLE 17.1

Balancing Equations for Redox Reactions in Acidic Solutions

Write the balanced equation representing reaction between solid copper and nitric acid to yield aqueous copper(II) ions and nitrogen monoxide gas.

Solution

Following the steps of the half-reaction method:

1. Writeskeletalequationsfortheoxidationandreductionhalf-reactions. oxidation:  reduction:   
2. Balanceeachhalf-reactionforal elementsexcept  and  . oxidation:  reduction:   
3. Balanceeachhalf-reactionfor  byad ing  . oxidation:  reduction:   
4. Balanceeachhalf-reactionfor  byad ing  . oxidation:  reduction:   
5. Balanceeachhalf-reactionforchargebyad ingelectrons. oxidation:  reduction:   
6. Ifneces ary,multiplyoneorbothhalf-reactionssothatthenumberofelectronsconsumedinoneisequal tothenumberproducedintheother. oxidation  ：  reduction  ：   
7. Ad thetwohalf-reactionsandsimplify.    
8. Ifthereactiontakesplaceinabasicmedium,ad  ionstheequationobtainedinstep7toneutralize the  ions(ad inequalnumberstobothsidesoftheequation)andsimplify.

This step not necessary since the solution is stipulated to be acidic. The balanced equation for the reaction in an acidic solution is then

Check Your Learning

The reaction above results when using relatively diluted nitric acid. If concentrated nitric acid is used, nitrogen dioxide is produced instead of nitrogen monoxide. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.

Answer:

EXAMPLE 17.2

Balancing Equations for Redox Reactions in Basic Solutions

Write the balanced equation representing reaction between aqueous permanganate ion,  , and solid chromium(III) hydroxide,  , to yield solid manganese(IV) oxide,  , and aqueous chromate ion,  The reaction takes place in a basic solution.

Solution

Following the steps of the half-reaction method:

1. Writeskeletalequationsfortheoxidationandreductionhalf-reactions. oxidation:  reduction:   
2. Balanceeachhalf-reactionforal elementsexcept  and  . oxidation:  reduction:   
3. Balanceeachhalf-reactionfor  byad ing  . oxidation:  reduction:   
4. Balanceeachhalf-reactionfor  byad ing  . oxidation:  reduction:   
5. Balanceeachhalf-reactionforchargebyad ingelectrons. oxidation:  reduction:   
6. Ifneces ary,multiplyoneorbothhalf-reactionssothatthenumberofelectronsconsumedinoneisequal tothenumberproducedintheother. This step is not necessary since the number of electrons is already in balance.   
7. Ad thetwohalf-reactionsandsimplify.   
 20(t)   
8. Ifthereactiontakesplaceinabasicmedium,ad  ionstheequationobtainedinstep7toneutralize the  ions(ad inequalnumberstobothsidesoftheequation)andsimplify.  + H2O(l)

Check Your Learning

Aqueous permanganate ion may also be reduced using aqueous bromide ion,  , the products of this reaction being solid manganese(IV) oxide and aqueous bromate ion,  . Write the balanced equation for this