15.4 Surface Integrals

The double integral in Green’s Theorem is over a flat surface  . Now the region moves out of the plane. It becomes a curved surface  , part of a sphere or cylinder or cone. When the surface has only one  for each  , it is the graph of a function  . In other cases  can twist and close up—a sphere has an upper  and a lower  . In all cases we want to compute area and flux. This is a necessary step (it is our last step) before moving Green’s Theorem to three dimensions.

First a quick review. The basic integrals are  and  and  . The one that didn’t fit was  —the length of a curve. When we go from curves to surfaces,  becomes  . Area is  and flux is  , with double integrals because the surfaces are two-dimensional. The main difficulty is in  .

All formulas are summarized in a table at the end of the section.

There are two ways to deal with  (along curves). The same methods apply to  (on surfaces). The first is in  coordinates; the second uses parameters. Before this subject gets complicated, I will explain those two methods.

Method 1 is for the graph of a function: curve  or surface  .

A small piece of the curve is almost straight. It goes across by  and up by  :

A small piece of the surface is practically flat. Think  Bof a Btiny sloping rectan gBle.  BOne side goes across by  and up by  . The neighboring side goes along by  and up by  . Computing the area is a linear problem (from Chapter 11), because the flat piece isin a plane.

Two vectors  and  form a parallelogram. The length of their cross product is the area. In the present case, the Bvect Borsare  and  Then  and  arethe sidesBof  tBhesmall piece, and we compute  :

This is exac|tly thenorm|al v|ec|tor  to the tan Bgen tBplane a Bnd  tBhe surface, from Chapter 13. Please note: The small flat piece is actually a parallelogram (not always a rectangle). Its area  is much like  , but the length of  involves two derivatives:

EXAMPLE 1 Find the area on the plane  above a base area  .

This is the example to visualize. The area down in the  plane is  . The area up on the sloping plane is greater than  . A roof has more area than the room underneath it. If the roof goes up at a  angle, the ratio is  . Formula (3) yields the correct ratio for any surface—including our plane  .

The derivatives are  and  . They are constant (planes are easy). The square r oBot i nB (3) contains  . Therefore  . An area in the  plane is multiplied by  up in the surface (Figure 15.14a). The vectors A and  are no longer needed—their work was done when we reached formula (3)—but here they are:

The length of  is  . The angle between  and  has  . That is the angle between base plane and sloping plane. Therefore the sloping area is  times the base area. For curved surfaces the idea is the same, except that the square root in  changes as we move around the surface.

Method 2 is for curves  and surfaces  ;  ;  with parameters.

A curve has one parameter  . A surface has two parameters  and  (it is twodimensional). One advantage of parameters is that  get equal treatment, instead of picking out  as  . Here are the first two examples:

Each choice of  and  gives a point on the surface. By making all choices, we get the complete surface. Notice that a parameter can equal a coordinate, as in  . Sometimes both parameters are coordinates, as in  and  and  . That is just  in disguise—the surface without parameters. In other cases we find the xyz equation by ealiminating u and  :

The cone is the garaph of  . The cylinder is not the graph of any function. There is a line of  through each point on the circle  . That?is what  tells us: Give  all values, and you get the whole line. Give  and  all values, and you get the whole cylinder. Parameters allow a surface to close up and even go through itself—which the graph of  can never do.

Actually  gives only the top half of the cone. (A function produces only one  .) The parametric form gives the bottom half also. Similarly  gives only the top of a circle, while  ;  goes all the way around.

Now we find  , usingBparameBters. Small movemBents giBve a piBece of the surface, practically flat. One side comes from the change  , the neighboring side comes from  . The two sides are given by small vectors  and  :

To find the area  of the parallelogram, start with the cross product  :

Ademittedly this looks complicated—actual examples are often fairly simple. The area  ofBtheBsmall BpiecBe of surfacBe is  . The lengtBh  is a BsquBare root:

EXAMPLE 2 Find  and  and  and  for the cone and cylinder.

The cone |has  ,  sinv,  . The  derivatives produce   . The  derivatives produce the other tangent vector   . The normal vector is  . Its length gives  :

The cylinder is even simpler:  . In these and many other examples,  is perpendicular to  . The small piece is a rectangle. Its sides have length  and  . (The cone has  and  , the cylinder has  . The cross product is hardly needed for area, when we can just multiply  times  .

Remark on the two methods Method 1 also used parameters, but a very special choice—  is  and  is  . The parametric equations are  ,  ,  . If you go through the long square root in (7), changing  to  and  to  , it simplifies to the square root in (3). (The terms  and  are zero;  and  are 1.) Still it pays to remember the shorter formula from Method 1.

Don’|t forget tha|t after |computing  , you have to integrate it. Many times the good is with polar coordinates. Surfaces are often symmetric around an axis or a point. Those are the surfaces of revolution—which we saw in Chapter 8 and will come back to.

Strictly speaking, the integral starts with  (not  ). A flat piece has area  or  . The area of a curved surface is properly defined as a limit. The key step of calculus, from sums of  to the integral of  , is safe for smooth surfaces. In examples, the hard part is computing the double integral and substituting the limits on  or  .

EBXAMPLE 3 Find theB surface area of the cone  up to the height  .   
We use Method 1 (no parameters). The derivatives of  are computed, squared, and added:

Conclusion:  and  . The cone is on a  slope, so the area  in the base is multiplied by  in the surface above it (Figure 15.15). The square root in  accounts for the extra area due to slope. A horizontal surface has  , as we have known all year.

Now for a key point. The integration is down in the base plane. The limits on  and  are given by the “shadow” of the cone. To locate that shadow set   equal to  . The plane cuts the c?one at the circle  . We integrate over the inside of that circle (where the shadow is):

EXAMPLE 4 Find the same area using  from Example 2.

With parameters,  looks different and the shadow in the base looks different. The circle  becomes  . In other?words  . (The cone has  , the plane has  , they meet when  .) The angle parameter  goes from 0 to  . The effect of these parameters is to switch us “automatically” to polar coordinates, where area is  :

EXAMPLE 5 Find the area of the same cone up to the sloping plane  .

Solution The cone still has  , but the limits of integration are changed. The plane cuts the cone in an ellipse. Its shadow down in the  plane is another

ellipse (Figure 15.15c). To find the edge of the shadow, set  equal to  . We square both sides:

This is the ellipse in the base—where h?eight makes no difference and  is gone. The area of an ellipse is  , when the equation is in the form  . After multiplying by  we find  and  . Then   is the surface area of the cone.

The hard part was finding the shadow ellipse (I went quickly). Its area  came from Example 15:3:2. The new part is  from the slope.

EXAMPLE 6 Find the surface area of a sphere of radius  (known to be  ).

This is a good example, because both methods almost work. The equation of the sphere is  . Method 1 writes  . The  and  derivatives are  and  :

The square root gives  . Notice that  is gone (as it should be). Now integrate  over the shadow of the sphere, which is a circle. Instead of  , switch to polar coordinates and  :

This calculation is successful but wrong.  is the area of the half-sphere above the  plane. The lower half takes the negative square root of  . This shows the danger of Method 1, when the surface is not the graph of a function.

EXAMPLE 7 (same sphere by Method 2: use parameters) The natural choice is s pBher iBcal c Boor dBinates.  BEve rBy po iBnt h Bas an angl e  down from the North Pole and an angle  around the equator. The  coordinates from Section 14.4 are  . The radius  is fixed (not a parameter). Compute the first term in equation (6), noting  :

The other terms in (6) are  and  . Then  in equation (7) squares these three components and adds. We factor out  and simplify:

Conclusion:  . A spherical person will recognize this immediately. It is the volume element  , except  is missing. The small box has area  and thickness  and volume  . Here we only want  :

Figure 15.16a shows a small surface with sides a  and  . Their product is  . Figure 15.16b goes back to Method 1, where equation (8) gave   .

I doubt that you will like Figure 15.16c—and you don’t need it. With parameters  and  , the shadow of the sphere is a rectangle. The equator is the line down the middle, where  . The height is  . The area  in the base is the shadow of  up in the sphere. Maybe this figure shows what we don’t halve to know about parameters.

EXAMPLE 8 Rotate  around the  axis. Find the surface area using parametears.

The first parameter is  (from  to  ). The second parameter is the rotation angle  (from 0 to  ). The points on the surface in Figure 15.17 are  ,  ,  . Equation (7) leads after much calculation to  . Main point:  agrees with Section 8.3, where the area was   . The  comes from the  integral and  is  . Parameters give this formula automatically.

VECTOR FIELDS AND THE INTEGRAL OF F n

Formulas for surface area are dominated by square roots. There is a square root in  , as there was in  . Areas are like arc lengths, one dimension up. The good point about line integrals  is that the square root disappears. It is in the denominator of  , where  cancels it:  . The same good thing will now happen for surface integrals  .

This formula tells what to integrate, given the surface and the vector field  and  ). The  limits come from the shadow. Formula (10) takes the normal vector from Method 1:

For the unit normal vector  , divide  by its length:  . The square root is in the denominator, and the same square root is in  . See equation (3):

That is formula (10), with cancellation of square roots. The expression  is often written as  , again relying on boldface to make  a vector. Then  equals  , with direction  and magnitude  .

EXAMPLE 9 Find ndS for the plane  . Then find  for  . This plane produced  in Example 1 (for area). For flux the  disappears:

For the flow field  , the dot product  reduces to  . Thae slope of the plane makes no difference! The flow through the base also flows through the plane. The areas are different, but flux is like rain. Whether it hits a tent or the ground below, it is thesame rain (Figurea15.18). In this case  shadow area in the base.

EXAMPLE 10 Find the flux of  through the cone  .

The zero comes as a surprise, but it shouldn’t. The cone goes straight out from the origin, and so does  . The vector  that is perpendicular to the cone is also perpendicular to  . There is no flow through the cone, because  . The flow travels out along rays.

In Example 10 the cone was  . We found  by Method 1. Parameters were not needed (more exactly, they were  and  ). For surfaces that fold and twist, the formulas with  and  look complicated but the actual calculations can be simpler. This was certainly the case for  on the cylinder.

A small piece of surface has area  . The vectors along the sides are  and  . They are tangent to the surface.

15.4 Surface Integrals

Now we put their cross product  to another use, because  involves not only area but direction. We need the unit vector  to see how much flow goes through.

The direction vector is  . Equation (7) is  , so the square root  cancels in ndS. This leaves a nice formula for the “normal component” of flow:

EXAMPLE 11 Find the flux of  through the cylinder   .

Solution The surface of the cylinder is  ,  ,  . The tangent vectors from (5) are  and  . The normal vector in Figure 15.19 goes straight out through the cylinder:

To find  , switc»h  to the parameters  and  . Then  :

For the flux, integrate  and apply the limits on  and  :

Note that the top and bottom were not included! We can find those fluxes too. The outward direction is  at the top and  down through the bottom. Then  is  at the top and  at the bottom. The bottom flux is zero, the top flux is  times the area (or  ). The total flux is  . Hold that answer for the next section.

Apology: I made  the angle and  the height. Then  goes outward not inward.

EXAMPLE 12 Find the flux of  out the top half of the sphere  a2.

Solution Use spherical coordinates. Example 7 had  and  . We found

The dot product with  is  . The integral goes from the pole to the equator,  to  , and around from  to  :

The next section will show that the flux remains at  through any surface (!) that is bounded by the equator. A special case is a flat surface—the disk of radius  at the equator. Figure 15.18 shows  pointing directly up, so  . The flux is  area of disk  . All fluid goes past the equator and out through the’sphere.

I have to mention one more problem. It might not occur to a reasonable person, but sometimes a surface has only one side. The famous example is the MRobius strip, for which you take a strip of paper, twist it once, and tape the ends together. Its special property appears when you run a pen along the “inside.” The pen in Figure 15.20 suddenly goes “outside.” After another round trip it goes back “inside.” Those words are in quotation marks, because on a MRobius strip they have no meaning.

Suppose the pen represents the normal vector. On a sphere n points outward. Alternatively n could point inward; we are free to choose. But the MRobius strip makes the choiceimpossible.After moving the pen continuously, it comes back in the opposite direction. This surface is not orientable. We cannot integrate  to compute the flux, because we cannot decide the direction of n.

A surface is oriented when we can and do choose n. This uses the final property of cross products, that they have length and direction and also a right-hand rule. We can tell  from  . Those give the two orientations of n. For an open surface (like a wastebasket) you can select either one. For a closed surface (like a sphere) it is conventional for  to be outward. By making that decision once and for all, the sign of the flux is established: outward flux is positive.

FORMULAS FOR SURFACE INTEGRALS