5.3 Elasticity: Stress and Strain

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

State Hooke’s law.   
• Explain Hooke’s law using graphical representation between deformation and applied force.   
• Discuss the three types of deformations such as changes in length, sideways shear and changes in volume.   
• Describe with examples the young’s modulus, shear modulus and bulk modulus.   
• Determine the change in length given mass, length and radius.

We now move from consideration of forces that affect the motion of an object (such as friction and drag) to those that affect an object’s shape. If a bulldozer pushes a car into a wall, the car will not move but it will noticeably change shape. A change in shape due to the application of a force is a deformation. Even very small forces are known to cause some deformation. For small deformations, two important characteristics are observed. First, the object returns to its original shape when the force is removed—that is, the deformation is elastic for small deformations. Second, the size of the deformation is proportional to the force—that is, for small deformations, Hooke’s law is obeyed. In equation form, Hooke’s law is given by

where  is the amount of deformation (the change in length, for example) produced by the force  , and  is a proportionality constant that depends on the shape and composition of the object and the direction of the force. Note that this force is a function of the deformation  —it is not constant as a kinetic friction force is. Rearranging this to

makes it clear that the deformation is proportional to the applied force. Figure 5.11 shows the Hooke’s law relationship between the extension  of a spring or of a human bone. For metals or springs, the straight line region in which Hooke’s law pertains is much larger. Bones are brittle and the elastic region is small and the fracture abrupt. Eventually a large enough stress to the material will cause it to break or fracture. Tensile strength is the breaking stress that will cause permanent deformation or fracture of a material.

Hooke’s Law

where  is the amount of deformation (the change in length, for example) produced by the force  , and  is a proportionality constant that depends on the shape and composition of the object and the direction of the force.

The proportionality constant  depends upon a number of factors for the material. For example, a guitar string made of nylon stretches when it is tightened, and the elongation  is proportional to the force applied (at least for small deformations). Thicker nylon strings and ones made of steel stretch less for the same applied force, implying they have a larger  (see Figure 5.12). Finally, all three strings return to their normal lengths when the force is removed, provided the deformation is small. Most materials will behave in this manner if the deformation is less than about  or about 1 part in  .

the right is steel.

Stretch Yourself a Little

How would you go about measuring the proportionality constant  of a rubber band? If a rubber band stretched 3 cm when a  mass was attached to it, then how much would it stretch if two similar rubber bands were attached to the same mass—even if put together in parallel or alternatively if tied together in series?

We now consider three specific types of deformations: changes in length (tension and compression), sideways shear (stress), and changes in volume. All deformations are assumed to be small unless otherwise stated.

Changes in Length—Tension and Compression: Elastic Modulus

A change in length  is produced when a force is applied to a wire or rod parallel to its length  , either stretching it (a tension) or compressing it. (See Figure 5.13.)

Experiments have shown that the change in length  depends on only a few variables. As already noted,  is proportional to the force  and depends on the substance from which the object is made. Additionally, the change in length is proportional to the original length  and inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area of the wire or rod. For example, a long guitar string will stretch more than a short one, and a thick string will stretch less than a thin one. We can combine all these factors into one equation for  :

where  is the change in length,  the applied force,  is a factor, called the elastic modulus or Young’s modulus, that depends on the substance,  is the cross-sectional area, and  is the original length. Table 5.3 lists values of  for several materials—those with a large  are said to have a large tensile stiffness because they deform less for a given tension or compression.

Young’s moduli are not listed for liquids and gases in Table 5.3 because they cannot be stretched or compressed in only one direction. Note that there is an assumption that the object does not accelerate, so that there are actually two applied forces of magnitude  acting in opposite directions. For example, the strings in Figure 5.13 are being pulled down by a force of magnitude  and held up by the ceiling, which also exerts a force of magnitude  .

EXAMPLE 5.3

The Stretch of a Long Cable

Suspension cables are used to carry gondolas at ski resorts. (See Figure 5.14) Consider a suspension cable that includes an unsupported span of  . Calculate the amount of stretch in the steel cable. Assume that the cable has a diameter of  and the maximum tension it can withstand is  .

Strategy

The force is equal to the maximum tension, or  . The cross-sectional area is  . The equation  can be used to find the change in length.

Solution

All quantities are known. Thus,

Discussion

This is quite a stretch, but only about  of the unsupported length. Effects of temperature upon length might be important in these environments.

Bones, on the whole, do not fracture due to tension or compression. Rather they generally fracture due to sideways impact or bending, resulting in the bone shearing or snapping. The behavior of bones under tension and compression is important because it determines the load the bones can carry. Bones are classified as weightbearing structures such as columns in buildings and trees. Weight-bearing structures have special features; columns in building have steel-reinforcing rods while trees and bones are fibrous. The bones in different parts of the body serve different structural functions and are prone to different stresses. Thus the bone in the top of the femur is

arranged in thin sheets separated by marrow while in other places the bones can be cylindrical and filled with marrow or just solid. Overweight people have a tendency toward bone damage due to sustained compressions in bone joints and tendons.

Another biological example of Hooke’s law occurs in tendons. Functionally, the tendon (the tissue connecting muscle to bone) must stretch easily at first when a force is applied, but offer a much greater restoring force for a greater strain. Figure 5.15 shows a stress-strain relationship for a human tendon. Some tendons have a high collagen content so there is relatively little strain, or length change; others, like support tendons (as in the leg) can change length up to  . Note that this stress-strain curve is nonlinear, since the slope of the line changes in different regions. In the first part of the stretch called the toe region, the fibers in the tendon begin to align in the direction of the stress—this is called uncrimping. In the linear region, the fibrils will be stretched, and in the failure region individual fibers begin to break. A simple model of this relationship can be illustrated by springs in parallel: different springs are activated at different lengths of stretch. Examples of this are given in the problems at end of this chapter. Ligaments (tissue connecting bone to bone) behave in a similar way.

Unlike bones and tendons, which need to be strong as well as elastic, the arteries and lungs need to be very stretchable. The elastic properties of the arteries are essential for blood flow. The pressure in the arteries increases and arterial walls stretch when the blood is pumped out of the heart. When the aortic valve shuts, the pressure in the arteries drops and the arterial walls relax to maintain the blood flow. When you feel your pulse, you are feeling exactly this—the elastic behavior of the arteries as the blood gushes through with each pump of the heart. If the arteries were rigid, you would not feel a pulse. The heart is also an organ with special elastic properties. The lungs expand with muscular effort when we breathe in but relax freely and elastically when we breathe out. Our skins are particularly elastic, especially for the young. A young person can go from  to  with no visible sag in their skins. The elasticity of all organs reduces with age. Gradual physiological aging through reduction in elasticity starts in the early 20s.

EXAMPLE 5.4

Calculating Deformation: How Much Does Your Leg Shorten When You Stand on It?

Calculate the change in length of the upper leg bone (the femur) when a  man supports  of his mass on it, assuming the bone to be equivalent to a uniform rod that is  long and  in radius.

Strategy

The force is equal to the weight supported, or

and the cross-sectional area is  . The equation  can be used to find the change in length.

Solution

All quantities except  are known. Note that the compression value for Young’s modulus for bone must be used here. Thus,

Discussion

This small change in length seems reasonable, consistent with our experience that bones are rigid. In fact, even the rather large forces encountered during strenuous physical activity do not compress or bend bones by large amounts. Although bone is rigid compared with fat or muscle, several of the substances listed in Table 5.3 have larger values of Young’s modulus  . In other words, they are more rigid.

The equation for change in length is traditionally rearranged and written in the following form:

The ratio of force to area,  , is defined as stress (measured in  ), and the ratio of the change in length to length,  , is defined as strain (a unitless quantity). In other words,

In this form, the equation is analogous to Hooke’s law, with stress analogous to force and strain analogous to deformation. If we again rearrange this equation to the form

we see that it is the same as Hooke’s law with a proportionality constant

This general idea—that force and the deformation it causes are proportional for small deformations—applies to changes in length, sideways bending, and changes in volume.

Stress

The ratio of force to area,  , is defined as stress measured in  .

Strain

The ratio of the change in length to length,  , is defined as strain (a unitless quantity). In other words,

Sideways Stress: Shear Modulus

Figure 5.16 illustrates what is meant by a sideways stress or a shearingforce. Here the deformation is called  and it is perpendicular to  , rather than parallel as with tension and compression. Shear deformation behaves similarly to tension and compression and can be described with similar equations. The expression for shear deformation is

where  is the shear modulus (see Table 5.3) and  is the force applied perpendicular to  and parallel to the cross-sectional area . Again, to keep the object from accelerating, there are actually two equal and opposite forces  applied across opposite faces, as illustrated in Figure 5.16. The equation is logical—for example, it is easier to bend a long thin pencil (small  ) than a short thick one, and both are more easily bent than similar steel rods (large  ).

Shear Deformation

where  is the shear modulus and  is the force applied perpendicular to  and parallel to the cross-sectional area  .

Examination of the shear moduli in Table 5.3 reveals some telling patterns. For example, shear moduli are less than Young’s moduli for most materials. Bone is a remarkable exception. Its shear modulus is not only greater than its Young’s modulus, but it is as large as that of steel. This is why bones are so rigid.

The spinal column (consisting of 26 vertebral segments separated by discs) provides the main support for the head and upper part of the body. The spinal column has normal curvature for stability, but this curvature can be increased, leading to increased shearing forces on the lower vertebrae. Discs are better at withstanding compressional forces than shear forces. Because the spine is not vertical, the weight of the upper body exerts some of both. Pregnant women and people that are overweight (with large abdomens) need to move their shoulders back to maintain balance, thereby increasing the curvature in their spine and so increasing the shear component of the stress. An increased angle due to more curvature increases the shear forces along the plane. These higher shear forces increase the risk of back injury through ruptured discs. The lumbosacral disc (the wedge shaped disc below the last vertebrae) is particularly at risk because of its location.

The shear moduli for concrete and brick are very small; they are too highly variable to be listed. Concrete used in buildings can withstand compression, as in pillars and arches, but is very poor against shear, as might be encountered in heavily loaded floors or during earthquakes. Modern structures were made possible by the use of steel and steel-reinforced concrete. Almost by definition, liquids and gases have shear moduli near zero, because they flow in response to shearing forces.

EXAMPLE 5.5

Calculating Force Required to Deform: That Nail Does Not Bend Much Under a Load

Find the mass of the picture hanging from a steel nail as shown in Figure 5.17, given that the nail bends only  . (Assume the shear modulus is known to two significant figures.)

Strategy

The force  on the nail (neglecting the nail’s own weight) is the weight of the picture  . If we can find  , then the mass of the picture is just  . The equation  can be solved for  .

Solution

Solving the equation  for  , we see that all other quantities can be found:

Sis found in Table 5.3 and is  . The radius  is  (as seen in the figure), so the crosssectional area is

The value for  is also shown in the figure. Thus,

This 51 N force is the weight  of the picture, so the picture’s mass is

Discussion

This is a fairly massive picture, and it is impressive that the nail flexes only  —an amount undetectable to the unaided eye.

Changes in Volume: Bulk Modulus

An object will be compressed in all directions if inward forces are applied evenly on all its surfaces as in Figure 5.18. It is relatively easy to compress gases and extremely difficult to compress liquids and solids. For example, air in a wine bottle is compressed when it is corked. But if you try corking a brim-full bottle, you cannot compress the wine—some must be removed if the cork is to be inserted. The reason for these different compressibilities is that atoms and molecules are separated by large empty spaces in gases but packed close together in liquids and solids. To compress a gas, you must force its atoms and molecules closer together. To compress liquids and solids, you must actually compress their atoms and molecules, and very strong electromagnetic forces in them oppose this compression.

We can describe the compression or volume deformation of an object with an equation. First, we note that a force “applied evenly” is defined to have the same stress, or ratio of force to area  on all surfaces. The deformation produced is a change in volume  , which is found to behave very similarly to the shear, tension, and compression previously discussed. (This is not surprising, since a compression of the entire object is equivalent to compressing each of its three dimensions.) The relationship of the change in volume to other physical quantities is given by

where  is the bulk modulus (see Table  ),  is the original volume, and  is the force per unit area applied uniformly inward on all surfaces. Note that no bulk moduli are given for gases.

What are some examples of bulk compression of solids and liquids? One practical example is the manufacture of industrial-grade diamonds by compressing carbon with an extremely large force per unit area. The carbon atoms rearrange their crystalline structure into the more tightly packed pattern of diamonds. In nature, a similar process occurs deep underground, where extremely large forces result from the weight of overlying material. Another natural source of large compressive forces is the pressure created by the weight of water, especially in deep parts of the oceans. Water exerts an inward force on all surfaces of a submerged object, and even on the water itself. At great depths, water is measurably compressed, as the following example illustrates.

EXAMPLE 5.6

Calculating Change in Volume with Deformation: How Much Is Water Compressed at Great Ocean Depths?

Calculate the fractional decrease in volume  for seawater at  depth, where the force per unit area is  .

Strategy

Equation  is the correct physical relationship. All quantities in the equation except  are known.

Solution

Solving for the unknown  gives

Substituting known values with the value for the bulk modulus  from Table 5.3,

Discussion

Although measurable, this is not a significant decrease in volume considering that the force per unit area is about 500 atmospheres (1 million pounds per square foot). Liquids and solids are extraordinarily difficult to compress.

Conversely, very large forces are created by liquids and solids when they try to expand but are constrained from doing so—which is equivalent to compressing them to less than their normal volume. This often occurs when a contained material warms up, since most materials expand when their temperature increases. If the materials are tightly constrained, they deform or break their container. Another very common example occurs when water freezes. Water, unlike most materials, expands when it freezes, and it can easily fracture a boulder, rupture a biological cell, or crack an engine block that gets in its way.

Other types of deformations, such as torsion or twisting, behave analogously to the tension, shear, and bulk deformations considered here.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Masses & Springs

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/5-3-elasticity-stress-and-strain)

Glossary

deformation change in shape due to the application of force   
drag force  , found to be proportional to the square of the speed of the object; mathematically   
FD α u²   
 where  is the drag coefficient,  is the area of the object facing the fluid, and  is the density of the fluid   
friction a force that opposes relative motion or attempts at motion between systems in contact   
Hooke’s law proportional relationship between the force  on a material and the deformation  it causes,    
kinetic friction a force that opposes the motion of two systems that are in contact and moving relative to one another   
magnitude of kinetic friction  , where  is the coefficient of kinetic friction   
magnitude of static friction  , where  is the coefficient of static friction and  is the magnitude of the normal force   
shear deformation deformation perpendicular to the original length of an object   
static friction a force that opposes the motion of two systems that are in contact and are not moving relative to one another   
Stokes’ law  , where  is the radius of the object,  is the viscosity of the fluid, and  is the object’s velocity   
strain ratio of change in length to original length   
stress ratio of force to area   
tensile strength the breaking stress that will cause permanent deformation or fraction of a material

Section Summary

5.1 Friction

• Friction is a contact force between systems that opposes the motion or attempted motion between them. Simple friction is proportional to the normal force  pushing the systems together. (A normal force is always perpendicular to the contact surface between systems.) Friction depends on both of the materials involved. The magnitude of static friction  between systems stationary relative to one another is given by  ， where  is the coefficient of static friction, which depends on both of the materials.   
• The kinetic friction force  between systems moving relative to one another is given by  ， where  is the coefficient of kinetic friction, which also depends on both materials.

5.2 Drag Forces

• Drag forces acting on an object moving in a fluid oppose the motion. For larger objects (such as a baseball) moving at a velocity  in air, the drag force is given by  where  is the drag coefficient (typical values are given in Table 5.2),  is the area of the object facing the fluid, and  is the fluid density.   
• For small objects (such as a bacterium) moving in a denser medium (such as water), the drag force is given by Stokes’ law,   
   
where  is the radius of the object,  is the fluid viscosity, and  is the object’s velocity.

5.3 Elasticity: Stress and Strain

• Hooke’s law is given by  ， where  is the amount of deformation (the change in length),  is the applied force, and  is a proportionality constant that depends on the shape and composition of the object and the direction of the force. The relationship between the deformation and the applied force can also be written as  where  is Young’smodulus, which depends on the substance,  is the cross-sectional area, and  is the original length. The ratio of force to area,  , is defined as stres , measured in  .   
• The ratio of the change in length to length,  , i defined as strain(a unitless quantity). In other words, stress  strain. The expression for shear deformation is  where  is the shear modulus and  is the force

applied perpendicular to  and parallel to the cross-sectional area . • The relationship of the change in volume to other physical quantities is given by

Conceptual Questions

5.1 Friction

1. Define normal force. What is its relationship to friction when friction behaves simply?   
2. The glue on a piece of tape can exert forces. Can these forces be a type of simple friction? Explain, considering especially that tape can stick to vertical walls and even to ceilings.   
3. When you learn to drive, you discover that you need to let up slightly on the brake pedal as you come to a stop or the car will stop with a jerk. Explain this in terms of the relationship between static and kinetic friction.   
4. When you push a piece of chalk across a chalkboard, it sometimes screeches because it rapidly alternates between slipping and sticking to the board. Describe this process in more detail, in particular explaining how it is related to the fact that kinetic friction is less than static friction. (The same slip-grab process occurs when tires screech on pavement.)

5.2 Drag Forces

5. Athletes such as swimmers and bicyclists wear body suits in competition. Formulate a list of pros and cons of such suits.   
6. Two expressions were used for the drag force experienced by a moving object in a liquid. One depended upon the speed, while the other was proportional to the square of the speed. In which types of motion would each of these expressions be more applicable than the other one?   
7. As cars travel, oil and gasoline leaks onto the road surface. If a light rain falls, what does this do to the control of the car? Does a heavy rain make any difference?

Problems & Exercises

5.1 Friction

1. A physics major is cooking breakfast when he notices that the frictional force between his steel spatula and his Teflon frying pan is only  . Knowing the coefficient of kinetic friction between the two materials, he quickly calculates the normal force. What is it?

 where  is the bulk modulus,  is the original volume, and  is the force per unit area applied uniformly inward on all surfaces.

8. Why can a squirrel jump from a tree branch to the ground and run away undamaged, while a human could break a bone in such a fall?

5.3 Elasticity: Stress and Strain

9. The elastic properties of the arteries are essential for blood flow. Explain the importance of this in terms of the characteristics of the flow of blood (pulsating or continuous).   
10. What are you feeling when you feel your pulse? Measure your pulse rate for 10 s and for 1 min. Is there a factor of 6 difference?   
11. Examine different types of shoes, including sports shoes and thongs. In terms of physics, why are the bottom surfaces designed as they are? What differences will dry and wet conditions make for these surfaces?   
12. Would you expect your height to be different depending upon the time of day? Why or why not?   
13. Would you expect a large or small stress to be required to deform a spider web? Why is this elasticity an important feature for a spider web?   
14. Explain why pregnant women often suffer from back strain late in their pregnancy.   
15. An old carpenter’s trick to keep nails from bending when they are pounded into hard materials is to grip the center of the nail firmly with pliers. Why does this help?   
16. When a glass bottle full of vinegar warms up, both the vinegar and the glass expand, but vinegar expands significantly more with temperature than glass. The bottle will break if it was filled to its tightly capped lid. Explain why, and also explain how a pocket of air above the vinegar would prevent the break. (This is the function of the air above liquids in glass containers.)

2. (a) When rebuilding her car’s engine, a physics major must exert 300 N of force to insert a dry steel piston into a steel cylinder. What is the magnitude of the normal force between the piston and cylinder? (b) What is the magnitude of the force would she have to exert if the steel parts were oiled?

3. (a) What is the maximum frictional force in the knee joint of a person who supports  of her mass on that knee? (b) During strenuous exercise it is possible to exert forces to the joints that are easily ten times greater than the weight being supported. What is the maximum force of friction under such conditions? The frictional forces in joints are relatively small in all circumstances except when the joints deteriorate, such as from injury or arthritis. Increased frictional forces can cause further damage and pain.

4. Suppose you have a  wooden crate resting on a wood floor. (a) What maximum force can you exert horizontally on the crate without moving it? (b) If you continue to exert this force once the crate starts to slip, what will the magnitude of its acceleration then be?

5. (a) If half of the weight of a small  utility truck is supported by its two drive wheels, what is the magnitude of the maximum acceleration it can achieve on dry concrete? (b) Will a metal cabinet lying on the wooden bed of the truck slip if it accelerates at this rate? (c) Solve both problems assuming the truck has four-wheel drive.

6. A team of eight dogs pulls a sled with waxed wood runners on wet snow (mush!). The dogs have average masses of  , and the loaded sled with its rider has a mass of  . (a) Calculate the magnitude of the acceleration starting from rest if each dog exerts an average force of  backward on the snow. (b) What is the magnitude of the acceleration once the sled starts to move? (c) For both situations, calculate the magnitude of the force in the coupling between the dogs and the sled.

7. Consider the  ice skater being pushed by two others shown in Figure 5.19. (a) Find the direction and magnitude of  , the total force exerted on her by the others, given that the magnitudes  and  are  and  , respectively. (b) What is her initial acceleration if she is initially stationary and wearing steel-bladed skates that point in the direction of  (c) What is her acceleration assuming she is already moving in the direction of  (Remember that friction always acts in the direction opposite that of motion or attempted motion between surfaces in contact.)

8. Show that the acceleration of any object down a frictionless incline that makes an angle  with the horizontal is  sin  . (Note that this acceleration is independent of mass.)   
9. Show that the acceleration of any object down an incline where friction behaves simply (that is, where  is  Note that the acceleration is independent of mass and reduces to the expression found in the previous problem when friction becomes negligibly small  ）.

10. Calculate the deceleration of a snow boarder going up a  , slope assuming the coefficient of friction for waxed wood on wet snow. The result of Exercise 5.9 may be useful, but be careful to consider the fact that the snow boarder is going uphill. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in Problem-Solving Strategies.

11. (a) Calculate the acceleration of a skier heading down a  slope, assuming the coefficient of friction for waxed wood on wet snow. (b) Find the angle of the slope down which this skier could coast at a constant velocity. You can neglect air resistance in both parts, and you will find the result of Exercise 5.9 to be useful. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategies.

12. If an object is to rest on an incline without slipping, then friction must equal the component of the weight of the object parallel to the incline. This requires greater and greater friction for steeper slopes. Show that the maximum angle of an incline above the horizontal for which an object will not slide down is  . You may use the result of the previous problem. Assume that  and that static friction has reached its maximum value.

13. Calculate the maximum deceleration of a car that is heading down a  slope (one that makes an angle of  with the horizontal) under the following road conditions. You may assume that the weight of the car is evenly distributed on all four tires and that the coefficient of static friction is involved—that is, the tires are not allowed to slip during the deceleration. (Ignore rolling.) Calculate for a car: (a) On dry concrete. (b) On wet concrete. (c) On ice, assuming that  , the same as for shoes on ice.

14. Calculate the maximum acceleration of a car that is heading up a  slope (one that makes an angle of  with the horizontal) under the following road conditions. Assume that only half the weight of the car is supported by the two drive wheels and that the coefficient of static friction is involved—that is, the tires are not allowed to slip during the acceleration. (Ignore rolling.) (a) On dry concrete. (b) On wet concrete. (c) On ice, assuming that  , the same as for shoes on ice.

15. Repeat Exercise 5.14 for a car with four-wheel drive.

16. A freight train consists of two  engines and 45 cars with average masses of  . (a) What force must each engine exert backward on the track to accelerate the train at a rate of  if the force of friction is  , assuming the engines exert identical forces? This is not a large frictional force for such a massive system. Rolling friction for trains is small, and consequently trains are very energy-efficient transportation systems. (b) What is the magnitude of the force in the coupling between the 37th and 38th cars (this is the force each exerts on the other), assuming all cars have the same mass and that friction is evenly distributed among all of the cars and engines?

17. Consider the  mountain climber in Figure 5.20. (a) Find the tension in the rope and the force that the mountain climber must exert with her feet on the vertical rock face to remain stationary. Assume that the force is exerted parallel to her legs. Also, assume negligible force exerted by her arms. (b) What is the minimum coefficient of friction between her shoes and the cliff?

18. A contestant in a winter sporting event pushes a  block of ice across a frozen lake as shown in Figure 5.21(a). (a) Calculate the minimum force  he must exert to get the block moving. (b) What is the magnitude of its acceleration once it starts to move, if that force is maintained?

19. Repeat Exercise 5.18 with the contestant pulling the block of ice with a rope over his shoulder at the same angle above the horizontal as shown in Figure 5.21(b).

5.2 Drag Forces

20. The terminal velocity of a person falling in air depends upon the weight and the area of the person facing the fluid. Find the terminal velocity (in meters per second and kilometers per hour) of an  skydiver falling in a headfirst position with a cross-section area facing the fluid of  .

21. A  and a  skydiver jump from an airplane at an altitude of  , both falling in a headfirst position. Make some assumption on their frontal areas and calculate their terminal velocities. How long will it take for each skydiver to reach the ground (assuming the time to reach terminal velocity is small)? Assume all values are accurate to three significant digits.

22. A  squirrel with a cross-section area facing the fluid of  falls from a  tree to the ground. Estimate its terminal velocity. (Use a drag coefficient for a horizontal skydiver.) What will be the velocity of a  person hitting the ground, assuming no drag contribution in such a short distance?

23. To maintain a constant speed, the force provided by a car’s engine must equal the drag force plus the force of friction of the road (the rolling resistance). (a) What are the magnitudes of drag forces at  and  for a Toyota Camry? (Drag area is  ) (b) What is the magnitude of drag force at  and  for a Hummer H2? (Drag area is  ) Assume all values are accurate to three significant digits.

24. By what factor does the drag force on a car increase as it goes from 65 to 

25. Calculate the speed a spherical rain drop would achieve falling from  (a) in the absence of air drag (b) with air drag. Take the size across of the drop to be  , the density to be  , and the cross-section area facing the fluid to be  .

26. Using Stokes’ law, verify that the units for viscosity are kilograms per meter per second.

27. Find the terminal velocity of a spherical bacterium (diameter  falling in water. You will first need to note that the drag force is equal to the weight at terminal velocity. Take the density of the bacterium to be  .

28. Stokes’ law describes sedimentation of particles in liquids and can be used to measure viscosity. Particles in liquids achieve terminal velocity quickly. One can measure the time it takes for a particle to fall a certain distance and then use Stokes’ law to calculate the viscosity of the liquid. Suppose a steel ball bearing (density  , diameter  ) is dropped in a container of motor oil. It takes 12 s to fall a distance of  . Calculate the viscosity of the oil.

5.3 Elasticity: Stress and Strain

29. During a circus act, one performer swings upside down hanging from a trapeze holding another, also upside-down, performer by the legs. If the upward force on the lower performer is three times her weight, how much do the bones (the femurs) in her upper legs stretch? You may assume each is equivalent to a uniform rod  long and 1.80 cm in radius. Her mass is  .

30. During a wrestling match, a  wrestler briefly stands on one hand during a maneuver designed to perplex her adversary. By how much does the upper arm bone shorten in length? The bone can be represented by a uniform rod  in length and  in radius.

31. (a) The “lead” in pencils is a graphite composition with a Young’s modulus of about  . Calculate the change in length of the lead in an automatic pencil if you tap it straight into the pencil with a force of  . The lead is  in diameter and  long. (b) Is the answer reasonable? That is, does it seem to be consistent with what you have observed when using pencils?

32. TV broadcast antennas are the tallest artificial structures on Earth. In 1987, a  physicist placed himself and  of equipment at the top of one  high antenna to perform gravity experiments. By how much was the antenna compressed, if we consider it to be equivalent to a steel cylinder  in radius?

33. (a) By how much does a  mountain climber stretch her 0.800-cm diameter nylon rope when they hang  below a rock outcropping? (b) Does the answer seem to be consistent with what you have observed for nylon ropes? Would it make sense if the rope were actually a bungee cord?

34. A  tall hollow aluminum flagpole is equivalent in stiffness to a solid cylinder  in diameter. A strong wind bends the pole much as a horizontal force of 900 N exerted at the top would. How far to the side does the top of the pole flex?

35. As an oil well is drilled, each new section of drill pipe supports its own weight and that of the pipe and drill bit beneath it. Calculate the stretch in a new  length of steel pipe that supports  of pipe having a mass of  and a  drill bit. The pipe is equivalent in stiffness to a solid cylinder  in diameter.

36. Calculate the force a piano tuner applies to stretch a steel piano wire  , if the wire is originally  in diameter and  long.

37. A vertebra is subjected to a shearing force of 500 N. Find the shear deformation, taking the vertebra to be a cylinder  high and  in diameter.

38. A disk between vertebrae in the spine is subjected to a shearing force of  . Find its shear deformation, taking it to have the shear modulus of  . The disk is equivalent to a solid cylinder  high and 4.00 cm in diameter.

39. When using a pencil eraser, you exert a vertical force of  at a distance of 2.00 cm from the hardwood-eraser joint. The pencil is  in diameter and is held at an angle of  to the horizontal. (a) By how much does the wood flex perpendicular to its length? (b) How much is it compressed lengthwise?

40. To consider the effect of wires hung on poles, we take data from Example 4.8, in which tensions in wires supporting a traffic light were calculated. The left wire made an angle  below the horizontal with the top of its pole and carried a tension of  . The  tall hollow aluminum pole is equivalent in stiffness to a 4.50 cm diameter solid cylinder. (a) How far is it bent to the side? (b) By how much is it compressed?

41. A farmer making grape juice fills a glass bottle to the brim and caps it tightly. The juice expands more than the glass when it warms up, in such a way that the volume increases by  (that is,  relative to the space available. Calculate the magnitude of the normal force exerted by the juice per square centimeter if its bulk modulus is  , assuming the bottle does not break. In view of your answer, do you think the bottle will survive?

42. (a) When water freezes, its volume increases by  (that is,  ). What force per unit area is water capable of exerting on a container when it freezes? (It is acceptable to use the bulk modulus of water in this problem.) (b) Is it surprising that such forces can fracture engine blocks, boulders, and the like?

43. This problem returns to the tightrope walker studied in Example 4.6, who created a tension of  in a wire making an angle  below the horizontal with each supporting pole. Calculate how much this tension stretches the steel wire if it was originally  long and 0.50 cm in diameter.

44. The pole in Figure 5.22 is at a  bend in a power line and is therefore subjected to more shear force than poles in straight parts of the line. The tension in each line is  , at the angles shown. The pole is  tall, has an 18.0 cm diameter, and can be considered to have half the stiffness of hardwood. (a) Calculate the compression of the pole. (b) Find how much it bends and in what direction. (c) Find the tension in a guy wire used to keep the pole straight if it is attached to the top of the pole at an angle of  with the vertical. (Clearly, the guy wire must be in the opposite direction of the bend.)

45. Critical Thinking Two spherical beads of the same mass fall at a constant speed due to a drag force. Bead A takes twice as long to fall the same distance as bead B. (a) Which of these beads has the larger radius? (b) Based on experimental data, an equation that fits the data is suggested for radius of a bead,  which may not be correct:  , where Kis a constant with appropriate units and  is the time it takes for a bead to reach a determined distance. Is this equation consistent with your answer from part a? Explain why or why not. Does this equation make sense? Explain why or why not. (c) Beads of different radii are selected and the time it takes to fall a set distance is recorded. Graph the radius of these beads as a function of the time it takes to fall a determined distance.