15.3 Coupled Equilibria

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe examples of systems involving two (or more) coupled chemical equilibria • Calculate reactant and product concentrations for coupled equilibrium systems

As discussed in preceding chapters on equilibrium, coupledequilibriainvolve two or more separate chemical reactions that share one or more reactants or products. This section of this chapter will address solubility equilibria coupled with acid-base and complex-formation reactions.

An environmentally relevant example illustrating the coupling of solubility and acid-base equilibria is the impact of ocean acidification on the health of the ocean’s coral reefs. These reefs are built upon skeletons of sparingly soluble calcium carbonate excreted by colonies of corals (small marine invertebrates). The relevant dissolution equilibrium is

Rising concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide contribute to an increased acidity of ocean waters due to the dissolution, hydrolysis, and acid ionization of carbon dioxide:

Inspection of these equilibria shows the carbonate ion is involved in the calcium carbonate dissolution and the acid hydrolysis of bicarbonate ion. Combining the dissolution equation with the reverse of the acid hydrolysis equation yields

The equilibrium constant for this net reaction is much greater than the  for calcium carbonate, indicating its solubility is markedly increased in acidic solutions. As rising carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere increase the acidity of ocean waters, the calcium carbonate skeletons of coral reefs become more prone to dissolution and subsequently less healthy (Figure 15.7).

“prilfish”/Flickr)

LINK TO LEARNING

Learn more about ocean acidification (http://openstax.org/l/16acidicocean) and how it affects other marine creatures.

This site (http://openstax.org/l/16coralreef) has detailed information about how ocean acidification specificall affects coral reefs.

The dramatic increase in solubility with increasing acidity described above for calcium carbonate is typical of salts containing basic anions (e.g., carbonate, fluoride, hydroxide, sulfide). Another familiar example is the formation of dental cavities in tooth enamel. The major mineral component of enamel is calcium hydroxyapatite (Figure 15.8), a sparingly soluble ionic compound whose dissolution equilibrium is

This compound dissolved to yield two different basic ions: triprotic phosphate ions

and monoprotic hydroxide ions:

Of the two basic productions, the hydroxide is, of course, by far the stronger base (it’s the strongest base that can exist in aqueous solution), and so it is the dominant factor providing the compound an acid-dependent solubility. Dental cavities form when the acid waste of bacteria growing on the surface of teeth hastens the dissolution of tooth enamel by reacting completely with the strong base hydroxide, shifting the hydroxyapatite solubility equilibrium to the right. Some toothpastes and mouth rinses contain added NaF or  that make enamel more acid resistant by replacing the strong base hydroxide with the weak base fluoride:

The weak base fluoride ion reacts only partially with the bacterial acid waste, resulting in a less extensive shift in the solubility equilibrium and an increased resistance to acid dissolution. See the Chemistry in Everyday Life feature on the role of fluoride in preventing tooth decay for more information.

Chemistry in Everyday Life

Role of Fluoride in Preventing Tooth Decay

As we saw previously, fluoride ions help protect our teeth by reacting with hydroxylapatite to form fluorapatite,  Since it lacks a hydroxide ion, fluorapatite is more resistant to attacks by acids in our mouths and is thus less soluble, protecting our teeth. Scientists discovered that naturally fluorinated water could be beneficial to your teeth, and so it became common practice to add fluoride to drinking water. Toothpastes and mouthwashes also contain amounts of fluoride (Figure 15.9).

Unfortunately, excess fluoride can negate its advantages. Natural sources of drinking water in various parts of the world have varying concentrations of fluoride, and places where that concentration is high are prone to certain health risks when there is no other source of drinking water. The most serious side effect of excess fluoride is the bone disease, skeletal fluorosis. When excess fluoride is in the body, it can cause the joints to stiffen and the bones to thicken. It can severely impact mobility and can negatively affect the thyroid gland. Skeletal fluorosis is a condition that over 2.7 million people suffer from across the world. So while fluoride can protect our teeth from decay, the US Environmental Protection Agency sets a maximum level of 4 ppm  of fluoride in drinking water in the US. Fluoride levels in water are not regulated in all countries, so fluorosis is a problem in areas with high levels of fluoride in the groundwater.

The solubility of ionic compounds may also be increased when dissolution is coupled to the formation of a complex ion. For example, aluminum hydroxide dissolves in a solution of sodium hydroxide or another strong base because of the formation of the complex ion 

The equations for the dissolution of aluminum hydroxide, the formation of the complex ion, and the combined (net) equation are shown below. As indicated by the relatively large value of K for the net reaction, coupling complex formation with dissolution drastically increases the solubility of  .

EXAMPLE 15.15

Increased Solubility in Acidic Solutions

Compute and compare the molar solublities for aluminum hydroxide,  , dissolved in (a) pure water and (b) a buffer containing 0.100  acetic acid and 0.100 Msodium acetate.

Solution

(a) The molar solubility of aluminum hydroxide in water is computed considering the dissolution equilibrium only as demonstrated in several previous examples:

(b) The concentration of hydroxide ion of the buffered solution is conveniently calculated by the HendersonHasselbalch equation:

At this  , the concentration of hydroxide ion is

The solubility of  in this buffer is then calculated from its solubility product expressions:

molar solubility in buffer

Compared to pure water, the solubility of aluminum hydroxide in this mildly acidic buffer is approximately ten million times greater (though still relatively low).

Check Your Learning

What is the solubility of aluminum hydroxide in a buffer comprised of 0.100 Mformic acid and 0.100 M sodium formate?

EXAMPLE 15.16

Multiple Equilibria

Unexposed silver halides are removed from photographic film when they react with sodium thiosulfate  , called hypo) to form the complex ion   .

What mass of  is required to prepare  of a solution that will dissolve  of  by the formation of 

Solution

Two equilibria are involved when silver bromide dissolves in an aqueous thiosulfate solution containing the  ion:

Combining these two equilibrium equations yields

The concentration of bromide resulting from dissolution of  of AgBr in  of solution is

The stoichiometry of the dissolution equilibrium indicates the same concentration of aqueous silver ion will result,  , and the very large value of  ensures that essentially all the dissolved silver ion will be complexed by thiosulfate ion:

Rearranging the K expression for the combined equilibrium equations and solving for the concentration of thiosulfate ion yields

Finally, the total mass of  required to provide enough thiosulfate to yield the concentrations cited above can be calculated.

Mass of  required to yield 

Mass of  required to yield 

The mass of  required to dissolve  of AgBr in  of water is thus 

Check Your Learning

 , silver chloride, has a very low solubility:  ，  . Adding ammonia significantly increases the solubility of AgCl because a complex ion is formed:  ，  . What mass of  is required to prepare  of solution that will dissolve  of  by formation of 

Answer:

 of a solution prepared with  dissolves 2.0 g of  .

Key Terms

common ion effect effect on equilibrium when a substance with an ion in common with the dissolved species is added to the solution; causes a decrease in the solubility of an ionic species, or a decrease in the ionization of a weak acid or base   
complex ion ion consisting of a central atom surrounding molecules or ions called ligands via coordinate covalent bonds   
coordinate covalent bond (also, dative bond) covalent bond in which both electrons originated from the same atom   
coupled equilibria system characterized the simultaneous establishment of two or more equilibrium reactions sharing one or more reactant or product   
dissociation constant  equilibrium constant for the decomposition of a complex ion into its components   
formation constant  (also, stability constant) equilibrium constant for the formation of a complex ion from its components   
Lewis acid any species that can accept a pair of electrons and form a coordinate covalent bond   
Lewis acid-base adduct compound or ion that contains a coordinate covalent bond between a Lewis acid and a Lewis base   
Lewis acid-base chemistry reactions involving the formation of coordinate covalent bonds   
Lewis base any species that can donate a pair of electrons and form a coordinate covalent bond   
ligand molecule or ion acting as a Lewis base in complex ion formation; bonds to the central atom of the complex   
molar solubility solubility of a compound expressed in units of moles per liter    
selective precipitation process in which ions are separated using differences in their solubility with a given precipitating reagent   
solubility product constant  equilibrium constant for the dissolution of an ionic compound

Key Equations

Summary

15.1 Precipitation and Dissolution

The equilibrium constant for an equilibrium involving the precipitation or dissolution of a slightly soluble ionic solid is called the solubility product,  , of the solid. For a heterogeneous equilibrium involving the slightly soluble solid  and its ions  and  :

the solubility product expression is:

The solubility product of a slightly soluble electrolyte can be calculated from its solubility; conversely, its solubility can be calculated from its  , provided the only significant reaction that occurs when the solid dissolves is the formation of its ions.

A slightly soluble electrolyte begins to precipitate when the magnitude of the reaction quotient for the dissolution reaction exceeds the magnitude of the solubility product. Precipitation continues until the reaction quotient equals the solubility product.

15.2 Lewis Acids and Bases

A Lewis acid is a species that can accept an electron pair, whereas a Lewis base has an electron pair available for donation to a Lewis acid. Complex ions are examples of Lewis acid-base adducts and comprise central metal atoms or ions acting as Lewis acids bonded to molecules or ions called ligands that act as Lewis bases. The equilibrium constant for the reaction between a metal ion and ligands produces a complex ion called a formation constant; for the reverse reaction, it is called a dissociation constant.

15.3 Coupled Equilibria

Systems involving two or more chemical equilibria that share one or more reactant or product are called coupled equilibria. Common examples of coupled equilibria include the increased solubility of some compounds in acidic solutions (coupled dissolution and neutralization equilibria) and in solutions containing ligands (coupled dissolution and complex formation). The equilibrium tools from other chapters may be applied to describe and perform calculations on these systems.

Exercises

15.1 Precipitation and Dissolution

1. Complete the changes in concentrations for each of the following reactions: (a)

X

2. Complete the changes in concentrations for each of the following reactions: (a)

 X   
(b   
 X   
(c)   
   
 X   
(e) 

 3. How do the concentrations of  and  in a saturated solution above  of solid  change when  of solid  is added to the system? Explain. 4. How do the concentrations of  and  change when  is added to a saturated solution of PbS?

5. What additional information do we need to answer the following question: How is the equilibrium of solid silver bromide with a saturated solution of its ions affected when the temperature is raised?

6. Which of the following slightly soluble compounds has a solubility greater than that calculated from its solubility product because of hydrolysis of the anion present:  , CuI,  ,  ,  ,  ?

7. Which of the following slightly soluble compounds has a solubility greater than that calculated from its solubility product because of hydrolysis of the anion present:  ,  ,  ,  ,  , and 

8. Write the ionic equation for dissolution and the solubility product  expression for each of the following slightly soluble ionic compounds: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

9. Write the ionic equation for the dissolution and the  expression for each of the following slightly soluble ionic compounds: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

10. The Handbo kofChemistryandPhysics(htp:/openstax.org/l/16Handbo k)gives solubilities of the following compounds in grams per  of water. Because these compounds are only slightly soluble, assume that the volume does not change on dissolution and calculate the solubility product for each. (a)  ,  (contains  ions) (b)  ,  (c)  ,  (d)  ,  (contains  ions)

11. The Handbo kofChemistryandPhysics(htp:/openstax.org/l/16Handbo k)gives solubilities of the following compounds in grams per  of water. Because these compounds are only slightly soluble, assume that the volume does not change on dissolution and calculate the solubility product for each. (a)  ,  4 (b)   (c)  ,  (d)  , 

12. Use solubility products and predict which of the following salts is the most soluble, in terms of moles per liter, in pure water:  ,  ,  , or  .

13. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the molar solubility of each of the following from its solubility product: (a)  (b)  (c)  , a salt containing the  ion (d) Hg2I2

14. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the molar solubility of each of the following from its solubility product: (a)  (b)  (c) AgI (d) 

15. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentration of all solute species in each of the following solutions of salts in contact with a solution containing a common ion. Show that changes in the initial concentrations of the common ions can be neglected. (a) AgCl(s) in 0.025 MNaCl (b)  in  KF (c)  in  of a solution containing  of  (d)  in a solution buffered at a pH of 11.45

16. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentration of all solute species in each of the following solutions of salts in contact with a solution containing a common ion. Show that changes in the initial concentrations of the common ions can be neglected. (a) TlCl(s) in 1.250 MHCl (b)  in  (c)  in  of a solution containing  of  (d)  in a solution buffered at a pH of 10.995

17. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentration of all solute species in each of the following solutions of salts in contact with a solution containing a common ion. Show that it is not appropriate to neglect the changes in the initial concentrations of the common ions. (a) TlCl(s) in  (b)  in  (c)  in  of a solution containing  of  (d)  in an unbuffered solution initially with a  of 12.700

18. Explain why the changes in concentrations of the common ions in Exercise 15.17 can be neglected.

19. Explain why the changes in concentrations of the common ions in Exercise 15.18 cannot be neglecte

0. Calculate the solubility of aluminum hydroxide,  , in a solution buffered at  .

21. Refer to Appendix J for solubility products for calcium salts. Determine which of the calcium salts listed most soluble in moles per liter and which is most soluble in grams per liter.

22. Most barium compounds are very poisonous; however, barium sulfate is often administered internally as an aid in the X-ray examination of the lower intestinal tract (Figure 15.4). This use of  is possible because of its low solubility. Calculate the molar solubility of  and the mass of barium present in  of water saturated with  .

23. Public Health Service standards for drinking water set a maximum of  of  because of its cathartic action (it is a laxative). Does natural water that is saturated with  (“gyp” water) as a result or passing through soil containing gypsum,  , meet these standards? What is the concentration of  in such water?

24. Perform the following calculations: (a) Calculate  in a saturated aqueous solution of AgBr. (b) What will  be when enough KBr has been added to make  (c) What will  be when enough  has been added to make 

25. The solubility product of  is  . What mass of this salt will dissolve in  of 0.010 M 

26. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentrations of ions in a saturated solution of each of the following (see Appendix J for solubility products). (a) TlCl (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) the mineral anglesite, 

27. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentrations of ions in a saturated solution of each of the following (see Appendix J for solubility products): (a) AgI (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) the mineral brucite, 

28. The following concentrations are found in mixtures of ions in equilibrium with slightly soluble solids. From the concentrations given, calculate  for each of the slightly soluble solids indicated:

29. The following concentrations are found in mixtures of ions in equilibrium with slightly soluble solids. From the concentrations given, calculate  for each of the slightly soluble solids indicated: (a) TlCl:  (b)  :  (c)  :  (d)   10–2 M (e)  :  , = 4.6 10−8 M

30. Which of the following compounds precipitates from a solution that has the concentrations indicated? (See Appendix J for  values.) (a)   (b)  (c)  :  (d) 

31. Which of the following compounds precipitates from a solution that has the concentrations indicated? (See Appendix J for  values.) (a)   (b)  :  (c)  :  (d) 

32. Calculate the concentration of  when TlCl just begins to precipitate from a solution that is 0.0250 Min  .

33. Calculate the concentration of sulfate ion when  just begins to precipitate from a solution that is  in  .

34. Calculate the concentration of  when  starts to precipitate from a solution that is 0.0025 Min 

35. Calculate the concentration of  when  starts to precipitate from a solution that is 0.0125 Min  .

36. Calculate the concentration of  required to begin precipitation of  in a solution that is 0.010  in Ca2+.

37. Calculate the concentration of  required to begin precipitation of  in a solution that is  

38. What  is required to reduce  to  by precipitation of  ?

39. What  is required to reduce  to  by precipitation of  ?

40. A volume of  of a  solution is added to  of  . Does  precipitate? Explain your answer.

41. Perform these calculations for nickel(II) carbonate. (a) With what volume of water must a precipitate containing  be washed to dissolve  of this compound? Assume that the wash water becomes saturated with   . (b) If the  were a contaminant in a sample of   , what mass of  would have been lost? Keep in mind that both  and  dissolve in the same solution.

42. Iron concentrations greater than  in water used for laundry purposes can cause staining. What  is required to reduce  to this level by precipitation of  0

43. A solution is  in both  and  . What percentage of  remains in the solution when  of the  has been precipitated as CuS by adding sulfide?

44. A solution is  in both  and  . If  is added to this solution, what is  when  begins to precipitate?

45. What reagent might be used to separate the ions in each of the following mixtures, which are  with respect to each ion? In some cases it may be necessary to control the pH. (Hint: Consider the  values given in Appendix J.)

(a)  and  (b)  and  (c)  and  (d)  and  (e)  and  (f )  and 

46. A solution contains  of KBr and  of KCl per liter.  is gradually added to this solution. Which forms first, solid AgBr or solid 

47. A solution contains  of KI and  of KCl per liter.  is gradually added to this solution. Which forms first, solid AgI or solid 

48. The calcium ions in human blood serum are necessary for coagulation (Figure 15.5). Potassium oxalate,  , is used as an anticoagulant when a blood sample is drawn for laboratory tests because it removes the calcium as a precipitate of  . It is necessary to remove all but  of the  in serum in order to prevent coagulation. If normal blood serum with a buffered pH of 7.40 contains  of  per  of serum, what mass of  is required to prevent the coagulation of a  blood sample that is  serum by volume? (All volumes are accurate to two significant figures. Note that the volume of serum in a  blood sample is  . Assume that the  value for  in serum is the same as in water.)

49. About  of urinary calculi (kidney stones) consist of calcium phosphate,  . The normal mid range calcium content excreted in the urine is  of  per day. The normal mid range amount of urine passed may be taken as  per day. What is the maximum concentration of phosphate ion that urine can contain before a calculus begins to form?

50. The pH of normal urine is 6.30, and the total phosphate concentration   is  What is the minimum concentration of  necessary to induce kidney stone formation? (See Exercise 15.49 for additional information.)

51. Magnesium metal (a component of alloys used in aircraft and a reducing agent used in the production of uranium, titanium, and other active metals) is isolated from sea water by the following sequence of reactions:  Sea water has a density of  and contains 1272 parts per million of magnesium as  by mass. What mass, in kilograms, of  is required to precipitate  of the magnesium in   of sea water?

52. Hydrogen sulfide is bubbled into a solution that is  in both  and  and  in HCl. After the solution has come to equilibrium it is saturated with   . What concentrations of  and  remain in the solution? For a saturated solution of  we can use the equilibrium:

(Hint: The  changes as metal sulfides precipitate.)

53. Perform the following calculations involving concentrations of iodate ions: (a) The iodate ion concentration of a saturated solution of La  was found to be  . Find the Ksp. (b) Find the concentration of iodate ions in a saturated solution of   .

54. Calculate the molar solubility of AgBr in 0.035 MNaBr  ).

55. How many grams of  will dissolve in  of a  solution 

56. Use the simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16solublesalts) from the earlier Link to Learning to complete the following exercise. Using  , give the  values found in a  solution of each of the salts. Discuss why the values change as you change soluble salts.

57. How many grams of Milk of Magnesia,  (s)  , would be soluble in  of water.   . Include the ionic reaction and the expression for  in your answer.  

58. Two hypothetical salts,  and LQ, have the same molar solubility in  If  for  is  , what is the  value for LQ?

59. The carbonate ion concentration is gradually increased in a solution containing equal concentrations of the divalent cations of magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium, and manganese. Which of the following carbonates will precipitate first? Which will precipitate last? Explain. (a)   (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) 

60. How many grams of  would be soluble in  of  Include the balanced reaction and the expression for  in your answer. The  value for  is  .

15.2 Lewis Acids and Bases

61. Even though  is an inexpensive base, its limited solubility restricts its use. What is the pH of a saturated solution of  ?   
62. Under what circumstances, if any, does a sample of solid  completely dissolve in pure water?   
63. Explain why the addition of  or  to a saturated solution of  in contact with solid  increases the solubility of the solid.   
64. Calculate the cadmium ion concentration,  , in a solution prepared by mixing  of 0.0100   with  of  .   
65. Explain why addition of  or  to a saturated solution of  in contact with solid  increases the solubility of the solid.   
66. Sometimes equilibria for complex ions are described in terms of dissociation constants,  . For the complex ion  the dissociation reaction is: AIF³-Al3++6FandKd=  Calculate the value of the formation constant,  , for    
67. Using the value of the formation constant for the complex ion  calculate the dissociation constant.   
68. Using the dissociation constant,  , calculate the equilibrium concentrations of  and  in a 0.250-Msolution of    
69. Using the dissociation constant,  , calculate the equilibrium concentrations of  and  in a 0.0465-Msolution of    
70. Using the dissociation constant,  , calculate the equilibrium concentrations of  and  in a 0.500-Msolution of    
71. Using the dissociation constant,  , calculate the equilibrium concentrations of  and  in a  solution of    
72. Calculate the mass of potassium cyanide ion that must be added to  of solution to dissolve   of silver cyanide,  .   
73. Calculate the minimum concentration of ammonia needed in  of solution to dissolve  of silver bromide.   
74. A roll of  black and white photographic film contains about  of unexposed AgBr before developing. What mass of  (sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate or hypo) in  of developer is required to dissolve the AgBr as   ?

75. We have seen an introductory definition of an acid: An acid is a compound that reacts with water and increases the amount of hydronium ion present. In the chapter on acids and bases, we saw two more definitions of acids: a compound that donates a proton (a hydrogen ion,  ) to another compound is called a Brønsted-Lowry acid, and a Lewis acid is any species that can accept a pair of electrons. Explain why the introductory definition is a macroscopic definition, while the Brønsted-Lowry definition and the Lewis definition are microscopic definitions.

76. Write the Lewis structures of the reactants and product of each of the following equations, and identify the Lewis acid and the Lewis base in each: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (use Al-Cl single bonds) (e) 

77. Write the Lewis structures of the reactants and product of each of the following equations, and identify the Lewis acid and the Lewis base in each: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) 

78. Using Lewis structures, write balanced equations for the following reactions: (a)  (b)  (c)  ↓ (d) 

79. Calculate  in a solution prepared by adding 0.0200 mol of NaCl to 0.250 L of a 0.100-MHgCl2 solution.

80. In a titration of cyanide ion,  of  is added before precipitation begins. [The reaction of  with  goes to completion, producing the  complex.] Precipitation of solid  takes place when excess  is added to the solution, above the amount needed to complete the formation of  How many grams of NaCN were in the original sample?

81. What are the concentrations of  ,  , and  in a saturated solution of    
82. In dilute aqueous solution HF acts as a weak acid. However, pure liquid HF (boiling point  is a strong acid. In liquid HF,  acts like a base and accepts protons. The acidity of liquid HF can be increased by adding one of several inorganic fluorides that are Lewis acids and accept  ion (for example,  or  ). Write balanced chemical equations for the reaction of pure  with pure HF and of pure HF with  .   
83. The simplest amino acid is glycine,  . The common feature of amino acids is that they contain the functional groups: an amine group,  , and a carboxylic acid group,  . An amino acid can function as either an acid or a base. For glycine, the acid strength of the carboxyl group is about the same as that of acetic acid,  , and the base strength of the amino group is slightly greater than that of ammonia,  . (a) Write the Lewis structures of the ions that form when glycine is dissolved in 1 MHCl and in 1 MKOH. (b) Write the Lewis structure of glycine when this amino acid is dissolved in water. (Hint: Consider the relative base strengths of the  and  groups.)

84. Boric acid,  , is not a Brønsted-Lowry acid but a Lewis acid.

(a) Write an equation for its reaction with water.   
(b) Predict the shape of the anion thus formed.   
(c) What is the hybridization on the boron consistent with the shape you have predicted?   
15.3 Coupled Equilibria   
85. A saturated solution of a slightly soluble electrolyte in contact with some of the solid electrolyte is said to be a system in equilibrium. Explain. Why is such a system called a heterogeneous equilibrium?   
86. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of  in a  solution  .   
87. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of  in a 0.30-Msolution of    
88. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of  in a solution initially with  and  .   
89. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of  in a solution initially with  and  .   
90. Calculate the  equilibrium concentration when 0.0888 mole of  is added to a solution with  .   
91. Calculate the  equilibrium concentration when 0.010 mole of  is added to a solution with  . Assume the volume is  .   
92. Calculate the molar solubility of  in a buffer solution containing equal concentrations of  and    
93. Calculate the molar solubility of  in a buffer solution with  and    
94. What is the molar solubility of  in a 0.100-Msolution of HF?  for  .   
95. What is the molar solubility of  in a 0.250-Msolution of  for  .   
96. What is the molar solubility of  in a 0.10-Msolution of    
97. What is the molar solubility of  in a 0.138-Msolution of  ?   
98. A solution of  is saturated with  . What is the minimum  at which CoS begins to precipitate?    
99. A 0.125-Msolution of  is saturated with  . At what pH does MnS begin to precipitate?    
100. Both  and AgI dissolve in  . (a) What mass of AgI dissolves in  of  (b) What mass of  dissolves in  of    
101. The following question is taken from a Chemistry Advanced Placement Examination and is used with the permission of the Educational Testing Service. Solve the following problem:  In a saturated solution of  at  , the concentration of  is  . The equilibrium is represented by the preceding equation. (a) Write the expression for the solubility-product constant,  , and calculate its value at  . (b) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of  in  of saturated  solution at  to which  of solid KF has been added. The KF dissolves completely. Assume the volume change is negligible. (c) Predict whether a precipitate of  will form when  of a  Msolution of  is mixed with  of a  Msolution of NaF at  . Show the calculations to support your prediction. (d) At  the concentration of  in a saturated solution of  is  Is the dissolving of  in water an endothermic or an exothermic process? Give an explanation to support your conclusion.   
102. Which of the following compounds, when dissolved in a  solution of  , has a solubility greater than in pure water: CuCl,  , MnS,  ,  Explain your answer.   
103. Which of the following compounds, when dissolved in a  solution of  , has a solubility greater than in pure water: AgBr,  ,  , ZnS,  Explain your answer.

104. What is the effect on the amount of solid  that dissolves and the concentrations of  and  when each of the following are added to a mixture of solid  and water at equilibrium?

(a)  (b) KOH (c)  (d)  (e) 

105. What is the effect on the amount of  that dissolves and the concentrations of  and  when each of the following are added to a mixture of solid  and water at equilibrium?

(a)  (b) HCl (c)  (d) NaOH (e) 

106. Identify all chemical species present in an aqueous solution of  and list these species in decreasing order of their concentrations. (Hint: Remember that the  ion is a weak base.)