12.1.1 Moore’s Law

Let us now take a deeper look at what happened between 1960 and 2012 in the world of processors. In the sixties, a computer was typically the size of a room, and today a computer fits in the pocket. A processor in a cell phone is around 1.6 million times faster than the IBM 360 machines in the early sixties. It is also several orders of magnitude more power efficient. The main driver for this continued evolution of computer technology is the miniaturization of the transistor. Transistors used to have a channel length of several millimeters in the sixties, and now they are about 20-30 nanometers long. In 1971, a typical chip used to have 2000-3000 transistors. Nowadays, a chip has billions of transistors.

Over the last forty to fifty years, the number of transistors per chip has been roughly doubling every 1-2 years. In fact, the co-founder of Intel, Gordon Moore, had predicted this trend in 1965. The Moore’s law (named in the honor of Gordon Moore) predicts that the number of transistors on a chip is expected to double every one to two years. Originally, Moore had predicted the period of doubling to be every year. However, over time, this period has become about 2 years. This was expected to happen because of the steady rate of advances in manufacturing technology, new materials, and fabrication techniques.

Historical Note 3   
In 1965, Gordon Moore (co-founder of Intel) conjectured that the number of transistors on a chip will double roughly every one to two years. Initially, the number of transistors was doubling every year. Gradually, the rate slowed down to 18 months, and now it is about two years.

The Moore’s law has approximately held true since it was proposed in the mid-sixties. Nowadays, almost every two years, the dimensions of transistors shrink by a factor of  . This ensures that the area of a transistor shrinks by a factor of 2, and thus it is possible to fit twice the number of transistors on a chip. Let us define the feature size as the size of the smallest structure that can be fabricated on a chip. Table 12.1 shows the feature sizes of Intel processors over the last 10 years. We observe that the feature size decreases by a factor of roughly  (1.41) every two years. This results in a doubling of the number of transistors.