16.11 Energy in Waves: Intensity

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Calculate the intensity and the power of rays and waves.

All waves carry energy. The energy of some waves can be directly observed. Earthquakes can shake whole cities to the ground, performing the work of thousands of wrecking balls.

Loud sounds pulverize nerve cells in the inner ear, causing permanent hearing loss. Ultrasound is used for deep-heat treatment of muscle strains. A laser beam can burn away a malignancy. Water waves chew up beaches.

The amount of energy in a wave is related to its amplitude. Large-amplitude earthquakes produce large ground displacements. Loud sounds have higher pressure amplitudes and come from larger-amplitude source vibrations than soft sounds. Large ocean breakers churn up the shore more than small ones. More quantitatively, a wave is a displacement that is resisted by a restoring force. The larger the displacement  , the larger the force  needed to create it. Because work  is related to force multiplied by distance  and energy is put into the wave by the work done to create it, the energy in a wave is related to amplitude. In fact, a wave’s energy is directly proportional to its amplitude squared because

The energy effects of a wave depend on time as well as amplitude. For example, the longer deep-heat ultrasound is applied, the more energy it transfers. Waves can also be concentrated or spread out. Sunlight, for example, can be

focused to burn wood. Earthquakes spread out, so they do less damage the farther they get from the source. In both cases, changing the area the waves cover has important effects. All these pertinent factors are included in the definition of intensity  as power per unit area:

where  is the power carried by the wave through area  . The definition of intensity is valid for any energy in transit, including that carried by waves. The SI unit for intensity is watts per square meter  ). For example, infrared and visible energy from the Sun impinge on Earth at an intensity of  just above the atmosphere. There are other intensity-related units in use, too. The most common is the decibel. For example, a 90 decibel sound level corresponds to an intensity of  . (This quantity is not much power per unit area considering that 90 decibels is a relatively high sound level. Decibels will be discussed in some detail in a later chapter.

EXAMPLE 16.9

Calculating intensity and power: How much energy is in a ray of sunlight?

The average intensity of sunlight on Earth’s surface is about  .

(a) Calculate the amount of energy that falls on a solar collector having an area of  in  . (b) What intensity would such sunlight have if concentrated by a magnifying glass onto an area 200 times smaller than its own?

Strategy a

Because power is energy per unit time or  , the definition of intensity can be written as  , and this equation can be solved for E with the given information.

Solution a

1. Begin with the equation that states the definition of intensity:

2. Replace  with its equivalent  :

3. Solve for  :

4. Substitute known values into the equation:

5. Calculate to find  and convert units:

Discussion a

The energy falling on the solar collector in  in part is enough to be useful—for example, for heating a significant amount of water.

Strategy b

Taking a ratio of new intensity to old intensity and using primes for the new quantities, we will find that it depends on the ratio of the areas. All other quantities will cancel.

Solution b

1. Take the ratio of intensities, which yields:

2. Identify the knowns:

3. Substitute known quantities:

4. Calculate to find  :

Discussion b

Decreasing the area increases the intensity considerably. The intensity of the concentrated sunlight could even start a fire.

EXAMPLE 16.10

Determine the combined intensity of two waves: Perfect constructive interference

If two identical waves are spatially separated, each having an intensity of  , interfere perfectly constructively in a particular location, what is the intensity of the wave at this particular location?

Strategy

We know from Superposition and Interference that when two identical waves, which have equal amplitudes  , interfere perfectly constructively, the resulting wave has an amplitude of  . Because a wave’s intensity is proportional to amplitude squared, the intensity of the resulting wave is four times as great as in the individual waves.

Solution

1. Recall that intensity is proportional to amplitude squared.

2. Calculate the new amplitude:

3. Recall that the intensity of the old amplitude was:

4. Take the ratio of new intensity to the old intensity. This gives:

5. Calculate to find  :

Discussion

The intensity goes up by a factor of 4 when the amplitude doubles. This answer is a little disquieting. The two individual waves each have intensities of  , yet their sum has an intensity of  , which may appear to violate conservation of energy. This violation, of course, cannot happen. What does happen is intriguing. The area over which the intensity is  is much less than the area covered by the two waves before they interfered. There are other areas where the intensity is zero. The addition of waves is not as simple as our first look in Superposition and Interference suggested. We actually get a pattern of both constructive interference and

destructive interference whenever two waves are added. For example, if we have two stereo speakers putting out  each, there will be places in the room where the intensity is  , other places where the intensity is zero, and others in between. Figure 16.41 shows what this interference might look like. We will pursue interference patterns elsewhere in this text.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Which measurement of a wave is most important when determining the wave's intensity? Solution Amplitude, because a wave’s energy is directly proportional to its amplitude squared.

Glossary

amplitude the maximum displacement from the equilibrium position of an object oscillating around the equilibrium position   
antinode the location of maximum amplitude in standing waves   
beat frequency the frequency of the amplitude fluctuations of a wave   
constructive interference when two waves arrive at the same point exactly in phase; that is, the crests of the two waves are precisely aligned, as are the troughs   
critical damping the condition in which the damping of an oscillator causes it to return as quickly as possible to its equilibrium position without oscillating back and forth about this position   
deformation displacement from equilibrium   
destructive interference when two identical waves arrive at the same point exactly out of phase; that is, precisely aligned crest to trough   
elastic potential energy potential energy stored as a result of deformation of an elastic object, such as the stretching of a spring   
force constant a constant related to the rigidity of a system: the larger the force constant, the more rigid the system; the force constant is represented by    
frequency number of events per unit of time   
fundamental frequency the lowest frequency of a periodic waveform   
intensity power per unit area   
longitudinal wave a wave in which the disturbance is parallel to the direction of propagation   
natural frequency the frequency at which a system would oscillate if there were no driving and no damping forces   
nodes the points where the string does not move; more generally, nodes are where the wave disturbance is zero in a standing wave   
oscillate moving back and forth regularly between two points   
over damping the condition in which damping of an oscillator causes it to return to equilibrium without oscillating; oscillator moves more slowly toward equilibrium than in the critically damped system   
overtones multiples of the fundamental frequency of a sound   
period time it takes to complete one oscillation   
periodic motion motion that repeats itself at regular time intervals   
resonance the phenomenon of driving a system with a frequency equal to the system's natural frequency   
resonate a system being driven at its natural frequency   
restoring force force acting in opposition to the force caused by a deformation   
simple harmonic motion the oscillatory motion in a system where the net force can be described by Hooke’s law   
simple harmonic oscillator a device that implements Hooke’s law, such as a mass that is attached to a spring, with the other end of the spring being connected to a rigid support such as a wall   
simple pendulum an object with a small mass suspended from a light wire or string   
superposition the phenomenon that occurs when two or more waves arrive at the same point   
transverse wave a wave in which the disturbance is perpendicular to the direction of propagation   
under damping the condition in which damping of an oscillator causes it to return to equilibrium with the amplitude gradually decreasing to zero; system returns to equilibrium faster but overshoots and crosses the equilibrium position one or more times   
wave a disturbance that moves from its source and carries energy   
wave velocity the speed at which the disturbance moves. Also called the propagation velocity or propagation speed   
wavelength the distance between adjacent identical parts of a wave

Section Summary

16.1 Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited

• An oscillation is a back and forth motion of an object between two points of deformation.   
• An oscillation may create a wave, which is a disturbance that propagates from where it was created. The simplest type of oscillations and waves are related to systems that can be described by

Hooke’s law:  ， where  is the restoring force,  is the displacement from equilibrium or deformation, and  is the force constant of the system. • Elastic potential energy  stored in the deformation of a system that can be described by Hooke’s law is given by 

16.2 Period and Frequency in Oscillations

• Periodic motion is a repetitious oscillation.   
The time for one oscillation is the period  .   
• The number of oscillations per unit time is the frequency  .   
These quantities are related by 

16.3 Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion

• Simple harmonic motion is oscillatory motion for a system that can be described only by Hooke’s law. Such a system is also called a simple harmonic oscillator.   
• Maximum displacement is the amplitude  . The period  and frequency  of a simple harmonic oscillator are given by  and  , where  is the mass of the system.   
• Displacement in simple harmonic motion as a function of time is given by  cos    
The velocity is given by  where  .   
• The acceleration is found to be  cos 

16.4 The Simple Pendulum

• A mass suspended by a wire of length  is a simple pendulum and undergoes simple harmonic motion for amplitudes less than about  . The period of a simple pendulum is  where  is the length of the string and  is the acceleration due to gravity.

16.5 Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator

Energy in the simple harmonic oscillator is shared between elastic potential energy and kinetic   
energy, with the total being constant:   
 constant.   
Maximum velocity depends on three factors: it is directly proportional to amplitude, it is greater for stiffer systems, and it is smaller for objects that have larger masses:   


16.6 Uniform Circular Motion and Simple Harmonic Motion

A projection of uniform circular motion undergoes simple harmonic oscillation.

16.7 Damped Harmonic Motion

• Damped harmonic oscillators have nonconservative forces that dissipate their energy.   
• Critical damping returns the system to equilibrium as fast as possible without overshooting.   
• An underdamped system will oscillate through the equilibrium position.   
• An overdamped system moves more slowly toward equilibrium than one that is critically damped.

16.8 Forced Oscillations and Resonance

• A system’s natural frequency is the frequency at which the system will oscillate if not affected by driving or damping forces.   
• A periodic force driving a harmonic oscillator at its natural frequency produces resonance. The system is said to resonate.   
• The less damping a system has, the higher the amplitude of the forced oscillations near resonance. The more damping a system has, the broader response it has to varying driving frequencies.

16.9 Waves

• A wave is a disturbance that moves from the point of creation with a wave velocity  . • A wave has a wavelength  , which is the distance between adjacent identical parts of the wave. • Wave velocity and wavelength are related to the wave’s frequency and period by  or  A transverse wave has a disturbance perpendicular to its direction of propagation, whereas a longitudinal wave has a disturbance parallel to its direction of propagation.

16.10 Superposition and Interference

• Superposition is the combination of two waves at the same location.   
• Constructive interference occurs when two identical waves are superimposed in phase. Destructive interference occurs when two identical waves are superimposed exactly out of phase.   
• A standing wave is one in which two waves superimpose to produce a wave that varies in amplitude but does not propagate. Nodes are points of no motion in standing waves.   
• An antinode is the location of maximum amplitude of a standing wave.   
• Waves on a string are resonant standing waves with a fundamental frequency and can occur at higher multiples of the fundamental, called overtones or harmonics.   
• Beats occur when waves of similar frequencies  and  are superimposed. The resulting amplitude

oscillates with a beat frequency given by 

16.11 Energy in Waves: Intensity

Intensity is defined to be the power per unit area:  and has units of  .

Conceptual Questions

16.1 Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited

1. Describe a system in which elastic potential energy is stored.

16.3 Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion

2. What conditions must be met to produce simple harmonic motion?

3. (a) If frequency is not constant for some oscillation, can the oscillation be simple harmonic motion? (b) Can you think of any examples of harmonic motion where the frequency may depend on the amplitude?   
4. Give an example of a simple harmonic oscillator, specifically noting how its frequency is independent of amplitude.   
5. Explain why you expect an object made of a stiff material to vibrate at a higher frequency than a similar object made of a spongy material.   
6. As you pass a freight truck with a trailer on a highway, you notice that its trailer is bouncing up and down slowly. Is it more likely that the trailer is heavily loaded or nearly empty? Explain your answer.   
7. Some people modify cars to be much closer to the ground than when manufactured. Should they install stiffer springs? Explain your answer.

16.4 The Simple Pendulum

8. Pendulum clocks are made to run at the correct rate by adjusting the pendulum’s length. Suppose you move from one city to another where the acceleration due to gravity is slightly greater, taking your pendulum clock with you, will you have to lengthen or shorten the pendulum to keep the correct time, other factors remaining constant? Explain your answer.

16.5 Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator

9. Explain in terms of energy how dissipative forces such as friction reduce the amplitude of a harmonic oscillator. Also explain how a driving mechanism can compensate. (A pendulum clock is such a system.)

16.7 Damped Harmonic Motion

10. Give an example of a damped harmonic oscillator. (They are more common than undamped or simple harmonic oscillators.)

11. How would a car bounce after a bump under each of these conditions?

overdamping • underdamping • critical damping

12. Most harmonic oscillators are damped and, if undriven, eventually come to a stop. How is this observation related to the second law of thermodynamics?

16.8 Forced Oscillations and Resonance

13. Why are soldiers in general ordered to “route step” (walk out of step) across a bridge?

16.9 Waves

14. Give one example of a transverse wave and another of a longitudinal wave, being careful to note the relative directions of the disturbance and wave propagation in each.   
15. What is the difference between propagation speed and the frequency of a wave? Does one or both affect wavelength? If so, how?

16.10 Superposition and Interference 16.11 Energy in Waves: Intensity

16. Speakers in stereo systems have two color-coded terminals to indicate how to hook up the wires. If the wires are reversed, the speaker moves in a direction opposite that of a properly connected speaker. Explain why it is important to have both speakers connected the same way.

17. Two identical waves undergo pure constructive interference. Is the resultant intensity twice that of the individual waves? Explain your answer.   
18. Circular water waves decrease in amplitude as they move away from where a rock is dropped. Explain why.

Problems & Exercises

16.1 Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited

1. Fish are hung on a spring scale to determine their mass (most fishermen feel no obligation to truthfully report the mass). (a) What is the force constant of the spring in such a scale if it the spring stretches 8.00 cm for a  load? (b) What is the mass of a fish that stretches the spring  (c) How far apart are the half-kilogram marks on the scale?   
2. It is weigh-in time for the local under-85-kg rugby team. The bathroom scale used to assess eligibility can be described by Hooke’s law and is depressed  by its maximum load of  . (a) What is the spring’s effective spring constant? (b) A player stands on the scales and depresses it by  . Is he eligible to play on this under-  team?   
3. One type of BB gun uses a spring-driven plunger to blow the BB from its barrel. (a) Calculate the force constant of its plunger’s spring if you must compress it  to drive the  plunger to a top speed of  . (b) What force must be exerted to compress the spring?   
4. (a) The springs of a pickup truck act like a single spring with a force constant of  . By how much will the truck be depressed by its maximum load of  (b) If the pickup truck has four identical springs, what is the force constant of each?   
5. When an  man stands on a pogo stick, the spring is compressed  . (a) What is the force constant of the spring? (b) Will the spring be compressed more when he hops down the road?   
6. A spring has a length of  when a  mass hangs from it, and a length of  when a 1.95-kg mass hangs from it. (a) What is the force constant of the spring? (b) What is the unloaded length of the spring?

16.2 Period and Frequency in Oscillations

7. What is the period of  electrical power?   
8. If your heart rate is 150 beats per minute during strenuous exercise, what is the time per beat in units of seconds?   
9. Find the frequency of a tuning fork that takes  to complete one oscillation.   
10. A stroboscope is set to flash every  . What is the frequency of the flashes?   
11. A tire has a tread pattern with a crevice every 2.00 cm. Each crevice makes a single vibration as the tire moves. What is the frequency of these vibrations if the car moves at    
12. Engineering Application Each piston of an engine makes a sharp sound every other revolution of the engine. (a) How fast is a race car going if its eight-cylinder engine emits a sound of frequency  , given that the engine makes 2000 revolutions per kilometer? (b) At how many revolutions per minute is the engine rotating?

16.3 Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion

13. A type of cuckoo clock keeps time by having a mass bouncing on a spring, usually something cute like a cherub in a chair. What force constant is needed to produce a period of 0.500 s for a 0.0150-kg mass?   
14. If the spring constant of a simple harmonic oscillator is doubled, by what factor will the mass of the system need to change in order for the frequency of the motion to remain the same?   
15. A 0.500-kg mass suspended from a spring oscillates with a period of 1.50 s. How much mass must be added to the object to change the period to    
16. By how much leeway (both percentage and mass) would you have in the selection of the mass of the object in the previous problem if you did not wish the new period to be greater than 2.01 s or less than 1.99 s?   
17. Suppose you attach the object with mass to a vertical spring originally at rest, and let it bounce up and down. You release the object from rest at the spring’s original rest length. (a) Show that the spring exerts an upward force of on the object at its lowest point. (b) If the spring has a force constant of  and a  -mass object is set in motion as described, find the amplitude of the oscillations. (c) Find the maximum velocity.   
18. A diver on a diving board is undergoing simple harmonic motion. Her mass is  and the period of her motion is 0.800 s. The next diver is a male whose period of simple harmonic oscillation is  . What is his mass if the mass of the board is negligible?   
19. Suppose a diving board with no one on it bounces up and down in a simple harmonic motion with a frequency of  . The board has an effective mass of  . What is the frequency of the simple harmonic motion of a  diver on the board?

21. A  skydiver hanging from a parachute bounces up and down with a period of  . What is the new period of oscillation when a second skydiver, whose mass is  , hangs from the legs of the first, as seen in Figure 16.43.

16.4 The Simple Pendulum

As usual, the acceleration due to gravity in these problems is taken to be  , unless otherwise specified.

20.

The device pictured in Figure 16.42 entertains infants while keeping them from wandering. The child bounces in a harness suspended from a door frame by a spring constant.   
(a) If the spring stretches  while   
supporting an  child, what is its spring   
constant?   
(b) What is the time for one complete bounce of this child? (c) What is the child’s maximum   
velocity if the amplitude of her bounce is    
22. What is the length of a pendulum that has a period of 0.500 s?   
23. Some people think a pendulum with a period of 1.00 s can be driven with “mental energy” or psycho kinetically, because its period is the same as an average heartbeat. True or not, what is the length of such a pendulum?   
24. What is the period of a 1.00-m-long pendulum?   
25. How long does it take a child on a swing to complete one swing if her center of gravity is 4.00 m below the pivot?   
26. The pendulum on a cuckoo clock is 5.00 cm long. What is its frequency?   
27. Two parakeets sit on a swing with their combined center of mass 10.0 cm below the pivot. At what frequency do they swing?   
28. (a) A pendulum that has a period of 3.00000 s and that is located where the acceleration due to gravity is  is moved to a location where the acceleration due to gravity is  . What is its new period? (b) Explain why so many digits are needed in the value for the period, based on the relation between the period and the acceleration due to gravity.   
29. A pendulum with a period of 2.00000 s in one location  is moved to a new location where the period is now 1.99796 s. What is the acceleration due to gravity at its new location?   
30. (a) What is the effect on the period of a pendulum if you double its length? (b) What is the effect on the period of a pendulum if you decrease its length by    
31. Find the ratio of the new/old periods of a pendulum if the pendulum were transported from Earth to the Moon, where the acceleration due to gravity is .   
32. At what rate will a pendulum clock run on the Moon, where the acceleration due to gravity is  , if it keeps time accurately on Earth? That is, find the time (in hours) it takes the clock’s hour hand to make one revolution on the Moon.   
33. Suppose the length of a clock’s pendulum is changed by  , exactly at noon one day. What time will it read 24.00 hours later, assuming it the pendulum has kept perfect time before the change? Note that there are two answers, and perform the calculation to four-digit precision.   
34. If a pendulum-driven clock gains  , what fractional change in pendulum length must be made for it to keep perfect time?

16.5 Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator

35. The length of nylon rope from which a mountain climber is suspended has a force constant of  (a) What is the frequency at which he bounces, given his mass plus and the mass of his equipment are  Ignore the change in gravitational potential energy after the cord begins to stretch. (b) How much would this rope stretch to break the climber’s fall if he free-falls  before the rope runs out of slack? Hint: Use conservation of energy. (c) Repeat both parts of this problem in the situation where twice this length of nylon rope is used.

36. Engineering Application Near the top of the Citigroup Center building in New York City, there is an object with mass of  on springs that have adjustable force constants. Its function is to dampen winddriven oscillations of the building by oscillating at the same frequency as the building is being driven—the driving force is transferred to the object, which oscillates instead of the entire building. (a) What effective force constant should the springs have to make the object oscillate with a period of  (b) What energy is stored in the springs for a  displacement from equilibrium?

16.6 Uniform Circular Motion and Simple Harmonic Motion

37. (a)What is the maximum velocity of an  person bouncing on a bathroom scale having a force constant of  , if the amplitude of the bounce is  (b)What is the maximum energy stored in the spring?   
38. A novelty clock has a  mass object bouncing on a spring that has a force constant of  . What is the maximum velocity of the object if the object bounces 3.00 cm above and below its equilibrium position? (b) How many joules of kinetic energy does the object have at its maximum velocity?   
39. At what positions is the speed of a simple harmonic oscillator half its maximum? That is, what values of  give  , where  is the amplitude of the motion?   
40. A ladybug sits  from the center of a Beatles music album spinning at 33.33 rpm. What is the maximum velocity of its shadow on the wall behind the turntable, if illuminated parallel to the record by the parallel rays of the setting Sun?

16.7 Damped Harmonic Motion

41. The amplitude of a lightly damped oscillator decreases by  during each cycle. What percentage of the mechanical energy of the oscillator is lost in each cycle?

16.8 Forced Oscillations and Resonance

42. How much energy must the shock absorbers of a  car dissipate in order to damp a bounce that initially has a velocity of  at the equilibrium position? Assume the car returns to its original vertical position.

43. If a car has a suspension system with a force constant of  , how much energy must the car’s shocks remove to dampen an oscillation starting with a maximum displacement of 

44. (a) How much will a spring that has a force constant of  be stretched by an object with a mass of  when hung motionless from the spring? (b) Calculate the decrease in gravitational potential energy of the  object when it descends this distance. (c) Part of this gravitational energy goes into the spring. Calculate the energy stored in the spring by this stretch, and compare it with the gravitational potential energy. Explain where the rest of the energy might go.

45. Suppose you have a  object on a horizontal surface connected to a spring that has a force constant of  . There is simple friction between the object and surface with a static coefficient of friction  . (a) How far can the spring be stretched without moving the mass? (b) If the object is set into oscillation with an amplitude twice the distance found in part (a), and the kinetic coefficient of friction is  , what total distance does it travel before stopping? Assume it starts at the maximum amplitude.

46. Engineering Application: A suspension bridge oscillates with an effective force constant of  (a) How much energy is needed to make it oscillate with an amplitude of  (b) If soldiers march across the bridge with a cadence equal to the bridge’s natural frequency and impart  of energy each second, how long does it take for the bridge’s oscillations to go from  to  amplitude?

51. Scouts at a camp shake the rope bridge they have just crossed and observe the wave crests to be  apart. If they shake the bridge twice per second, what is the propagation speed of the waves?

52. What is the wavelength of the waves you create in a swimming pool if you splash your hand at a rate of  and the waves propagate at 

53. What is the wavelength of an earthquake that shakes you with a frequency of  and gets to another city  away in 

54. Radio waves transmitted through space at  by the Voyager spacecraft have a wavelength of  . What is their frequency?

55. Your ear is capable of differentiating sounds that arrive at the ear just 1.00 ms apart. What is the minimum distance between two speakers that produce sounds that arrive at noticeably different times on a day when the speed of sound is  s?

56. (a) Seismographs measure the arrival times of earthquakes with a precision of 0.100 s. To get the distance to the epicenter of the quake, they compare the arrival times of S- and P-waves, which travel at different speeds. Figure 16.44) If S- and P-waves travel at 4.00 and  , respectively, in the region considered, how precisely can the distance to the source of the earthquake be determined? (b) Seismic waves from underground detonations of nuclear bombs can be used to locate the test site and detect violations of test bans. Discuss whether your answer to (a) implies a serious limit to such detection. (Note also that the uncertainty is greater if there is an uncertainty in the propagation speeds of the S- and P-waves.)

16.9 Waves

47. Storms in the South Pacific can create waves that travel all the way to the California coast, which are  away. How long does it take them if they travel at    
48. Waves on a swimming pool propagate at  s. You splash the water at one end of the pool and observe the wave go to the opposite end, reflect, and return in 30.0 s. How far away is the other end of the pool?   
49. Wind gusts create ripples on the ocean that have a wavelength of  and propagate at  . What is their frequency?   
50. How many times a minute does a boat bob up and down on ocean waves that have a wavelength of  and a propagation speed of 

16.10 Superposition and Interference

57. A car has two horns, one emitting a frequency of  and the other emitting a frequency of 203 Hz. What beat frequency do they produce?   
58. The middle-C hammer of a piano hits two strings, producing beats of  . One of the strings is tuned to  . What frequencies could the other string have?   
59. Two tuning forks having frequencies of 460 and  are struck simultaneously. What average frequency will you hear, and what will the beat frequency be?   
60. Twin jet engines on an airplane are producing an average sound frequency of  with a beat frequency of  . What are their individual frequencies?   
61. A wave traveling on a Slinky® that is stretched to 4 m takes  to travel the length of the Slinky and back again. (a) What is the speed of the wave? (b) Using the same Slinky stretched to the same length, a standing wave is created which consists of three antinodes and four nodes. At what frequency must the Slinky be oscillating?   
62. Three adjacent keys on a piano (F, F-sharp, and G) are struck simultaneously, producing frequencies of 349, 370, and  . What beat frequencies are produced by this discordant combination?

16.11 Energy in Waves: Intensity

63. Medical Application

Ultrasound of intensity  is produced by the rectangular head of a medical imaging device measuring 3.00 by  . What is its power output?

64. The low-frequency speaker of a stereo set has a surface area of  and produces 1W of acoustical power. What is the intensity at the speaker? If the speaker projects sound uniformly in all directions, at what distance from the speaker is the intensity 

65. To increase intensity of a wave by a factor of 50, by what factor should the amplitude be increased?

66. Engineering Application A device called an insolation meter is used to measure the intensity of sunlight has an area of  and registers 6.50 W. What is the intensity in  ?   
67. Astronomy Application Energy from the Sun arrives at the top of the Earth’s atmosphere with an intensity of  How long does it take for  to arrive on an area of    
68. Suppose you have a device that extracts energy from ocean breakers in direct proportion to their intensity. If the device produces  of power on a day when the breakers are  high, how much will it produce when they are  high?   
69. Engineering Application (a) A photovoltaic array of (solar cells) is  efficient in gathering solar energy and converting it to electricity. If the average intensity of sunlight on one day is  what area should your array have to gather energy at the rate of 100 W? (b) What is the maximum cost of the array if it must pay for itself in two years of operation averaging 10.0 hours per day? Assume that it earns money at the rate of  per kilowatt-hour.   
70. A microphone receiving a pure sound tone feeds an oscilloscope, producing a wave on its screen. If the sound intensity is originally  but is turned up until the amplitude increases by  , what is the new intensity?   
71. Medical Application (a) What is the intensity in  of a laser beam used to burn away cancerous tissue that, when  absorbed, puts 500 J of energy into a circular spot  in diameter in  (b) Discuss how this intensity compares to the average intensity of sunlight (about  ) and the implications that would have if the laser beam entered your eye. Note how the amount of damage depends on the time duration of the exposure.