11.3 Pressure

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define pressure. Explain the relationship between pressure and force. • Calculate force given pressure and area.

You have no doubt heard the word pressure being used in relation to blood (high or low blood pressure) and in relation to the weather (high- and low-pressure weather systems). These are only two of many examples of pressures in fluids. Pressure  is defined as

where  is a force applied to an area  that is perpendicular to the force.

Pressure

Pressure is defined as the force divided by the area perpendicular to the force over which the force is applied, or

A given force can have a significantly different effect depending on the area over which the force is exerted, as shown in Figure 11.5. The SI unit for pressure is the pascal, where

In addition to the pascal, there are many other units for pressure that are in common use. In meteorology, atmospheric pressure is often described in units of millibar (mb), where

Pounds per square inch  is still sometimes used as a measure of tire pressure, and millimeters of

mercury  is still often used in the measurement of blood pressure. Pressure is defined for all states of matter but is particularly important when discussing fluids.

EXAMPLE 11.2

Calculating Force Exerted by the Air: What Force Does a Pressure Exert?

An astronaut is working outside the International Space Station where the atmospheric pressure is essentially zero. The pressure gauge on her air tank reads  . What force does the air inside the tank exert on the flat end of the cylindrical tank, a disk  in diameter?

Strategy

We can find the force exerted from the definition of pressure given in  , provided we can find the area  acted upon.

Solution

By rearranging the definition of pressure to solve for force, we see that

Here, the pressure  is given, as is the area of the end of the cylinder  , given by  . Thus,

Discussion

Wow! No wonder the tank must be strong. Since we found  , we see that the force exerted by a pressure is directly proportional to the area acted upon as well as the pressure itself.

The force exerted on the end of the tank is perpendicular to its inside surface. This direction is because the force is exerted by a static or stationary fluid. We have already seen that fluids cannot withstandshearing (sideways) forces; they cannot exertshearing forces, either. Fluid pressure has no direction, being a scalar quantity. The forces due to pressure have well-defined directions: they are always exerted perpendicular to any surface. (See the tire in Figure  , for example.) Finally, note that pressure is exerted on all surfaces. Swimmers, as well as the tire, feel pressure on all sides. (See Figure 11.7.)

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Gas Properties

Pump gas molecules to a box and see what happens as you change the volume, add or remove heat, change gravity, and more. Measure the temperature and pressure, and discover how the properties of the gas vary in relation to each other.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/11-3-pressure)