17.5 Genomics and Proteomics

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Explain systems biology Describe a proteome Define protein signature

Proteins are the final products of genes, which help perform the function that the gene encodes. Amino acids comprise proteins and play important roles in the cell. All enzymes (except ribozymes) are proteins that act as catalysts to affect the rate of reactions. Proteins are also regulatory molecules, and some are hormones. Transport proteins, such as hemoglobin, help transport oxygen to various organs. Antibodies that defend against foreign particles are also proteins. In the diseased state, protein function can be impaired because of changes at the genetic level or because of direct impact on a specific protein.

A proteome is the entire set of proteins that a cell type produces. We can study proteoms using the knowledge of genomes because genes code for mRNAs, and the mRNAs encode proteins. Although mRNA analysis is a step in the right direction, not all mRNAs are translated into proteins. Proteomics is the study of proteomes' function. Proteomics complements genomics and is useful when scientists want to test their hypotheses that they based on genes. Even though all multicellular organisms' cells have the same set of genes, the set of proteins produced in different tissues is different and dependent on gene expression. Thus, the genome is constant, but the proteome varies and is dynamic within an organism. In addition, RNAs can be alternately spliced (cut and pasted to create novel combinations and novel proteins) and many proteins modify themselves after translation by processes such as proteolytic cleavage, phosphorylation, glycosylation, and ubiquitination. There are also protein-protein interactions, which complicate studying proteomes. Although the genome provides a blueprint, the final architecture depends on several factors that can change the progression of events that generate the proteome.

Metabolomics is related to genomics and proteomics. Metabolomics involves studying small molecule metabolites in an organism. The metabolome is the complete set of metabolites that are related to an organism's genetic makeup. Metabolomics offers an opportunity to compare genetic makeup and physical characteristics, as well as genetic makeup and environmental factors. The goal of metabolome research is to identify, quantify, and catalogue all the metabolites in living organisms' tissues and fluids.

Basic Techniques in Protein Analysis

The ultimate goal of proteomics is to identify or compare the proteins expressed from a given genome under specific conditions, study the interactions between the proteins, and use the information to predict cell behavior or develop drug targets. Just as scientists analyze the genome using the basic DNA sequencing technique, proteomics requires techniques for protein analysis. The basic technique for protein analysis, analogous to DNA sequencing, is mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry identifies and determines a molecule's characteristics. Advances in spectrometry have allowed researchers to analyze very small protein samples. X-ray crystallography, for example, enables scientists to determine a protein crystal's three-dimensional structure at atomic resolution. Another protein imaging technique, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), uses atoms' magnetic properties to determine the protein's three-dimensional structure in aqueous solution. Scientists have also used protein microarrays to study protein interactions. Large-scale adaptations of the basic two-hybrid screen (Figure 17.17) have provided the basis for protein microarrays. Scientists use computer software to analyze the vast amount of data for proteomic analysis.

Genomic- and proteomic-scale analyses are part of systems biology, which is the study of whole biological systems (genomes and proteomes) based on interactions within the system. The European Bioinformatics Institute and the Human Proteome Organization (HUPO) are developing and establishing effective tools to sort through the enormous pile of systems biology data. Because proteins are the direct products of genes and reflect activity at the genomic level, it is natural to use proteomes to compare the protein profiles of different cells to identify proteins and genes involved in disease processes. Most pharmaceutical drug trials target proteins. Researchers use information that they obtain from proteomics to identify novel drugs and to understand their mechanisms of action.

Scientists are challenged when implementing proteomic analysis because it is difficult to detect small protein quantities. Although mass spectrometry is good for detecting small protein amounts, variations in protein expression in diseased states can be difficult to discern. Proteins are naturally unstable molecules, which makes proteomic analysis much more difficult than genomic analysis.

Cancer Proteomics

Researchers are studying patients' genomes and proteomes to understand the genetic basis of diseases. The most prominent disease researchers are studying with proteomic approaches is cancer. These approaches improve screening and early cancer detection. Researchers are able to identify proteins whose expression indicates the disease process. An individual protein is a biomarker; whereas, a set of proteins with altered expression levels is a protein signature. For a biomarker or protein signature to be useful as a candidate for early cancer screening and detection, they must secrete in body fluids, such as sweat, blood, or urine, such that health professionals can perform large-scale screenings in a noninvasive fashion. The current problem with using biomarkers for early cancer detection is the high rate of false-negative results. A false negative is an incorrect test result that should have been positive. In other words, many cancer cases go undetected, which makes biomarkers unreliable. Some examples of protein biomarkers in cancer detection are CA-125 for ovarian cancer and PSA for prostate cancer. Protein signatures may be more reliable than biomarkers to detect cancer cells. Researchers are also using proteomics to develop individualized treatment plans, which involves predicting whether or not an individual will respond to specific drugs and the side effects that the individual may experience. Researchers also use proteomics to predict the possibility of disease recurrence.

The National Cancer Institute has developed programs to improve cancer detection and treatment. The Clinical Proteomic Technologies for Cancer and the Early Detection Research Network are efforts to identify protein signatures specific to different cancer types. The Biomedical Proteomics Program identifies protein signatures and designs effective therapies for cancer patients.

KEY TERMS

antibiotic resistance ability of an organism to be unaffected by an antibiotic's actions   
biomarker individual protein that is uniquely produced in a diseased state   
biotechnology use of biological agents for technological advancement   
cDNA library collection of cloned cDNA sequences   
cellular cloning production of identical cell populations by binary fission   
chain termination method method of DNA sequencing using labeled dideoxynucleotides to terminate DNA replication; it is also called the dideoxy method or the Sanger method   
clone exact replica   
contig larger sequence of DNA assembled from overlapping shorter sequences   
cytogenetic mapping technique that uses a microscope to create a map from stained chromosomes   
deoxynucleotide individual DNA monomer (single unit)   
dideoxynucleotide individual DNA monomer that is missing a hydroxyl group (–OH)   
DNA microarray method to detect gene expression by analyzing many DNA fragments that are fixed to a glass slide or a silicon chip to identify active genes and identify sequences   
expressed sequence tag (EST) short STS that is identified with cDNA   
false negative incorrect test result that should have been positive   
foreign DNA DNA that belongs to a different species or DNA that is artificially synthesized   
gel electrophoresis technique used to separate molecules on the basis of size using electric charge   
gene targeting method for altering the sequence of a specific gene by introducing the modified version on a vector   
gene therapy technique used to cure inheritable diseases by replacing mutant genes with good genes   
genetic diagnosis diagnosis of the potential for disease development by analyzing disease-causing genes   
genetic engineering alteration of the genetic makeup of an organism   
genetic map outline of genes and their location on a chromosome   
genetic marker gene or sequence on a chromosome with a known location that is associated with a specific trait   
genetic recombination DNA exchange between homologous chromosome pairs   
genetic testing process of testing for the presence of disease-causing genes   
genetically modified organism (GMO) organism whose genome has been artificially changed   
genome annotation process of attaching biological information to gene sequences   
genome mapping process of finding the location of genes on each chromosome   
genomic library collection of cloned DNA which represents all of the sequences and fragments from a genome   
genomics study of entire genomes including the complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence and organization, and their interactions within a species and with other species   
host DNA DNA that is present in the genome of the organism of interest   
linkage analysis procedure that analyzes recombining genes to determine if they are linked   
lysis buffer solution to break the cell membrane and release cell contents   
metabolome complete set of metabolites which are related to an organism's genetic makeup   
metabolomics study of small molecule metabolites in an organism   
metagenomics study of multiple species' collective genomes that grow and interact in an environmental niche   
microsatellite polymorphism variation between individuals in the sequence and number of microsatellite DNA repeats   
model organism species that researchers study and use as a model to understand the biological processes in other species represented by the model organism   
molecular cloning cloning of DNA fragments   
multiple cloning site (MCS) site that multiple restriction endonucleases can recognize   
next-generation sequencing group of automated techniques for rapid DNA sequencing   
Northern blotting transfer of RNA from a gel to a nylon membrane   
pharmacogenomics study of drug interactions with the genome or proteome; also called toxicogenomics   
physical map representation of the physical distance between genes or genetic markers   
polygenic phenotypic characteristic caused by two or more genes   
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique to amplify DNA   
probe small DNA fragment to determine if the complementary sequence is present in a DNA sample   
protease enzyme that breaks down proteins   
protein signature set of uniquely expressed proteins in the diseased state   
proteome entire set of proteins that cell type produces   
proteomics study of proteomes' function   
pure culture growth of a single cell type in the laboratory   
radiation hybrid mapping information obtained by fragmenting the chromosome with x-rays   
recombinant DNA combining DNA fragments that molecular cloning generates that do not exist in nature; also a chimeric molecule   
recombinant protein a gene's protein product derived by molecular cloning   
reproductive cloning entire organism cloning   
restriction endonuclease enzyme that can recognize and cleave specific DNA sequences   
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) variation between individuals in the length of DNA fragments, which restriction endonucleases generate   
reverse genetics method of determining the gene's function by starting with the gene itself instead of starting with the gene product   
reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) PCR technique that involves converting RNA to DNA by reverse transcriptase   
ribonuclease enzyme that breaks down RNA   
sequence mapping mapping information obtained after DNA sequencing   
shotgun sequencing method used to sequence multiple DNA fragments to generate the sequence of a large piece of DNA   
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variation between individuals in a single nucleotide   
Southern blotting DNA transfer from a gel to a nylon membrane   
systems biology study of whole biological systems (genomes and proteomes) based on interactions within the system   
Ti plasmid plasmid system derived from Agrobacterium tumifaciensthat scientists have used to introduce foreign DNA into plant cells   
transgenic organism that receives DNA from a different species   
variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs) variation in the number of tandem repeats between individuals in the population   
whole-genome sequencing process that determines an entire genome's DNA sequence

CHAPTER SUMMARY 17.1 Biotechnology

Nucleic acids can be isolated from cells for the purposes of further analysis by breaking open the cells and enzymatically destroying all other major macromolecules. Fragmented or whole chromosomes can separate on the basis of size by gel electrophoresis. PCR can amplify short DNA or RNA stretches. Researchers can use Southern and Northern blotting to detect the presence of specific short sequences in a DNA or RNA sample. The term “cloning” may refer to cloning small DNA fragments (molecular cloning), cloning cell populations (cellular cloning), or cloning entire organisms (reproductive cloning). Medical professionals perform genetic testing to identify disease-causing genes, and use gene therapy to cure an inheritable disease.

Transgenic organisms possess DNA from a different species, usually generated by molecular cloning techniques. Vaccines, antibiotics, and hormones are examples of products obtained by recombinant DNA technology. Scientists usually create transgenic plants to improve crop plant characteristics.

between the genes. The most detailed information is available through sequence mapping. Researchers combine information from all mapping and sequencing sources to study an entire genome.

17.3 Whole-Genome Sequencing

Whole-genome sequencing is the latest available resource to treat genetic diseases. Some doctors are using wholegenome sequencing to save lives. Genomics has many industrial applications including biofuel development, agriculture, pharmaceuticals, and pollution control. The basic principle of all modern-day sequencing strategies involves the chain termination method of sequencing.

Although the human genome sequences provide key insights to medical professionals, researchers use whole-genome sequences of model organisms to better understand the species' genome. Automation and the decreased cost of whole-genome sequencing may lead to personalized medicine in the future.

17.4 Applying Genomics

17.2 Mapping Genomes

Genome mapping is similar to solving a big, complicated puzzle with pieces of information coming from laboratories all over the world. Genetic maps provide an outline for locating genes within a genome, and they estimate the distance between genes and genetic markers on the basis of recombination frequencies during meiosis. Physical maps provide detailed information about the physical distance

Imagination is the only barrier to the applicability of genomics. Researchers are applying genomics to most fields of biology. They use it for personalized medicine, prediction of disease risks at an individual level, studying drug interactions before conducting clinical trials, and studying microorganisms in the environment as opposed to the laboratory. They are also applying it to developments such as generating new biofuels, genealogical assessment using

mitochondria, advances in forensic science, and improvements in agriculture.

17.5 Genomics and Proteomics

Proteomics is the study of the entire set of proteins expressed by a given type of cell under certain environmental conditions. In a multicellular organism, different cell types will have different proteomes, and these will vary with environmental changes. Unlike a genome, a proteome is dynamic and in constant flux, which makes it both more

complicated and more useful than the knowledge of genomes alone.

Proteomics approaches rely on protein analysis. Researchers are constantly upgrading these techniques. Researchers have used proteomics to study different cancer types. Medical professionals are using different biomarkers and protein signatures to analyze each cancer type. The future goal is to have a personalized treatment plan for each individual.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 17.7 You are working in a molecular biology lab and, unbeknownst to you, your lab partner left the foreign genomic DNA that you are planning to clone on the lab bench overnight instead of storing it in the freezer. As a result, it was degraded by nucleases, but still used in the experiment. The plasmid, on the other hand, is fine. What results would you expect from your molecular cloning experiment?

a. There will be no colonies on the bacterial plate.   
b. There will be blue colonies only.   
c. There will be blue and white colonies.   
d. The will be white colonies only.

2. Figure 17.8 Do you think Dolly was a Finn-Dorset or a Scottish Blackface sheep?

3. Figure 17.15 In 2011, the United States Preventative Services Task Force recommended against using the PSA test to screen healthy men for prostate cancer. Their recommendation is based on evidence that screening does not reduce the risk of death from prostate cancer. Prostate cancer often develops very slowly and does not cause problems, while the cancer treatment can have severe side effects. The  test is more accurate, but screening may still result in men who would not have been harmed by the cancer itself suffering side effects from treatment. What do you think? Should all healthy men be screened for prostate cancer using the PCA3or PSA test? Should people in general be screened to find out if they have a genetic risk for cancer or other diseases?

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. GMOs are created by

a. generating genomic DNA fragments with restriction endonucleases   
b. introducing recombinant DNA into an organism by any means   
c. overexpressing proteins in E.coli   
d. all of the above

5. Gene therapy can be used to introduce foreign DNA into cells

a. for molecular cloning   
b. by PCR   
c. of tissues to cure inheritable disease   
d. all of the above

6. Insulin produced by molecular cloning:

a. is of pig origin b. is a recombinant protein c. is made by the human pancreas d. is recombinant DNA

7. Bt toxin is considered to be a. a gene for modifying insect DNA b. an organic insecticide produced by bacteria c. useful for humans to fight against insects d. a recombinant protein

8. The Flavr Savr Tomato:

a. is a variety of vine-ripened tomato in the supermarket   
b. was created to have better flavor and shelf-life   
c. does not undergo soft rot   
d. all of the above

9. ESTs are

a. generated after a cDNA library is made b. unique sequences in the genome c. useful for mapping using sequence information d. all of the above

10. Linkage analysis a. is used to create a physical map b. is based on the natural recombination process c. requires radiation hybrid mapping d. involves breaking and rejoining of DNA artificially

11. Genetic recombination occurs by which process?

a. independent assortment b. crossing over c. chromosome segregation d. sister chromatids

12. Individual genetic maps in a given species are:

a. genetically similar b. genetically identical c. genetically dissimilar d. not useful in species analysis

13. Information obtained by microscopic analysis of stained chromosomes is used in:

a. radiation hybrid mapping b. sequence mapping c. RFLP mapping d. cytogenetic mapping

14. The chain termination method of sequencing:

a. uses labeled ddNTPs b. uses only dideoxynucleotides c. uses only deoxynucleotides d. uses labeled dNTPs

15. Whole-genome sequencing can be used for advances in:

a. the medical field b. agriculture c. biofuels d. all of the above

16. Sequencing an individual person’s genome

a. is currently possible   
b. could lead to legal issues regarding discrimination and privacy   
c. could help make informed choices about medical treatment   
d. all of the above

17. What is the most challenging issue facing genome sequencing?

a. the inability to develop fast and accurate sequencing techniques   
b. the ethics of using information from genomes at the individual level   
c. the availability and stability of DNA   
d. all of the above

18. Genomics can be used in agriculture to:

a. generate new hybrid strains b. improve disease resistance c. improve yield   
d. all of the above

19. Genomics can be used on a personal level to:

a. decrease transplant rejection   
b. predict genetic diseases that a person may have inherited   
c. determine the risks of genetic diseases for an individual’s children   
d. all of the above

20. What is a biomarker?

a. the color coding of different genes b. a protein that is uniquely produced in a diseased state c. a molecule in the genome or proteome d. a marker that is genetically inherited

21. A protein signature is:

a. the path followed by a protein after it is synthesized in the nucleus b. the path followed by a protein in the cytoplasm c. a protein expressed on the cell surface d. a unique set of proteins present in a diseased state

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

22. Describe the process of Southern blotting.

23. A researcher wants to study cancer cells from a patient with breast cancer. Is cloning the cancer cells an option?   
24. How would a scientist introduce a gene for herbicide resistance into a plant?   
25. If you had a chance to get your genome sequenced, what are some questions you might be able to have answered about yourself?   
26. Why is so much effort being poured into genome mapping applications?   
27. How could a genetic map of the human genome help find a cure for cancer?   
28. Explain why metagenomics is probably the most revolutionary application of genomics.   
29. How can genomics be used to predict disease risk and treatment options?   
30. How has proteomics been used in cancer detection and treatment?   
31. What is personalized medicine?