13.7.2 SATA

Overview

Let us now take a look at a bus, which was primarily developed for connecting storage devices such as hard disks, and optical drives. Since the mid-eighties, designers, and storage vendors, began designing such buses. Several such buses developed over time such as the IDE (Integrated Drive Electronics) and PATA (Parallel Advanced Technology Attachment) buses. These buses were predominantly parallel buses, and their constituent communication links suffered from different amounts of jitter and distortion. Thus, these technologies got replaced by a serial standard known as SATA (Serial ATA), that is a point-to-point link like PCI Express.

The SATA protocol for accessing storage devices is now used in an overwhelming majority of laptop and desktop processors. It has become the de facto standard. The SATA protocol has three layers – physical, data link, and transport. We map the transport layer of the SATA protocol to our protocol layer. Each SATA link contains a pair of single-bit links that use LVDS signaling. Unlike PCI Express, it is not possible for an end point in the SATA protocol to read and write data at the same time. Only one of the actions can be performed at any point of time. It is thus a half duplex bus. It uses 8b/10b encoding, and it is an asynchronous bus. The data link layer does the job of framing. Let us now discuss the network layer. Since SATA is a point-to-point protocol, a set of SATA devices can be connected in a tree structure. Each internal node of the tree is known as a multiplier. It routes requests from the parent to one of its children, or from one of its children to its parent. Finally, the protocol layer acts on the frames and ensures that they are transmitted in the correct sequence, and implements SATA commands. In specific, it implements DMA requests, accesses the storage devices, buffers data, and sends it to the processor in a predefined order.

Summary

Table 13.6 shows the specification of the SATA protocol. We need to note that the SATA protocol has a very rich protocol layer. It defines a wide variety of commands for storage-based devices. For example, it has dedicated commands to perform DMA accesses, perform direct hard disk accesses, encode and encrypt data, and control the internals of storage devices. The SATA bus is a split transaction bus, and the data link layer differentiates between commands and their responses. The protocol layer implements the semantics of all the commands.