7.5.1 Summary

Summary 7 1. Modern processors use silicon-based transistors. Silicon is a semi-conductor. However, its properties can be modified by adding impurities (known as doping) from the III, and V groups of the periodic table. If we add group III elements such as boron (  type), we remove a charge carrier from the silicon atom lattice, and thus create a hole. Similarly, if we add a group V element such as phosphorus (n type), then we introduce an additional electron to the lattice. In either case, we increase the conductivity of silicon. 2. We can create a p-n junction by juxtaposing p-type and n-type silicon structures. A p-n junction conducts when it is forward biased (the p side is connected to the higher voltage), and stops conducting when it is reverse biased. 3. We can create an NMOS transistor by having two wells of n-type silicon in a ptype substrate. These wells are connected to electrical terminals, and are known as the source and drain. The area between the wells is known as the channel, and is separated from an electrical terminal (known as the gate) by a thin layer of silicon dioxide. When we apply a positive voltage (  threshold voltage) at the gate, the NMOS transistor can conduct current. Otherwise, it acts like an open circuit. 4. In comparison, the PMOS transistor has two p-type wells in an n-type substrate. It forms a conducting path, when the voltage at the gate is 0V. 5. We can use NMOS and PMOS transistors to implement a basic inverter, NAND, NOR, AND and OR gates. 6. We can use these basic gates to create a host of complex structures such as the XOR gate, multiplexer, decoder, encoder, and priority encoder. 7. By creating a feedback path between NAND or NOR gates, we can save a logical bit. This structure is known as a latch. If we enable and disable access to a latch-based on the value of a clock signal, then the latch is known as a flip flop. 8. We have considered SR, JK, and D flip flops in this chapter. The SR flip flop does not have deterministic outputs for all combinations of input transitions. 9. We use a master slave design for JK, and D flip flops because we can make the inputs appear at the outputs almost instantaneously at the negative clock edge. 10. A set of flip flops can be used to make registers.

11. We use a cross coupled pair of inverters to make an SRAM cell. It is connected by two transistors (enabled by a word line) to a pair of bit lines. A sense amplifier monitors the difference in voltages across the pair of bit lines. Based on the sign of the difference, we can infer a logical 0 or 1.   
12. In comparison, a DRAM cell uses a single transistor and a capacitor. It is a high density memory technology. However, we need to regularly refresh the value of DRAM cells to keep it operational.   
13. We can modify the basic structure of a DRAM cell by creating hardwired connections between the transistor and the supply rails to implement read-only memory. Programmable ROM (PROM) cells use an antifuse to create an alterable connection to  .   
14. We can create programmable logic arrays for computing the values of Boolean expressions by arranging PLA cells (similar to PROM cells) in an array. In the AND plane, each row computes the value of a minterm. In the OR plane, we compute a logical OR of all the minterms that form a part of the Boolean expression.