33.6 GUTs: The Unification of Forces

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

State the grand unified theory. Explain the electroweak theory. Define gluons. Describe the principle of quantum chromodynamics. • Define the standard model.

Present quests to show that the four basic forces are different manifestations of a single unified force follow a long tradition. In the 19th century, the distinct electric and magnetic forces were shown to be intimately connected and are now collectively called the electromagnetic force. More recently, the weak nuclear force has been shown to be connected to the electromagnetic force in a manner suggesting that a theory may be constructed in which all four forces are unified. Certainly, there are similarities in how forces are transmitted by the exchange of carrier particles, and the carrier particles themselves (the gauge bosons in Table 33.2) are also similar in important ways. The

analogy to the unification of electric and magnetic forces is quite good—the four forces are distinct under normal circumstances, but there are hints of connections even on the atomic scale, and there may be conditions under which the forces are intimately related and even indistinguishable. The search for a correct theory linking the forces, called the Grand Unified Theory (GUT), is explored in this section in the realm of particle physics. Frontiers of Physics expands the story in making a connection with cosmology, on the opposite end of the distance scale.

Figure 33.21 is a Feynman diagram showing how the weak nuclear force is transmitted by the carrier particle  , similar to the diagrams in Figure 33.5 and Figure 33.6 for the electromagnetic and strong nuclear forces. In the 1960s, a gauge theory, called electroweak theory, was developed by Steven Weinberg, Sheldon Glashow, and Abdus Salam and proposed that the electromagnetic and weak forces are identical at sufficiently high energies. One of its predictions, in addition to describing both electromagnetic and weak force phenomena, was the existence of the  , and  carrier particles. Not only were three particles having spin 1 predicted, the mass of the  and  was predicted to be  , and that of the  was predicted to be  . (Their masses had to be about 1000 times that of the pion, or about  , since the range of the weak force is about 1000 times less than the strong force carried by virtual pions.) In 1983, these carrier particles were observed at CERN with the predicted characteristics, including masses having the predicted values as seen in Table 33.2. This was another triumph of particle theory and experimental effort, resulting in the 1984 Nobel Prize to the experiment’s group leaders Carlo Rubbia and Simon van der Meer. Theorists Weinberg, Glashow, and Salam had already been honored with the 1979 Nobel Prize for other aspects of electroweak theory.

Although the weak nuclear force is very short ranged  , as indicated in Table 33.1), its effects on atomic levels can be measured given the extreme precision of modern techniques. Since electrons spend some time in the nucleus, their energies are affected, and spectra can even indicate new aspects of the weak force, such as the possibility of other carrier particles. So systems many orders of magnitude larger than the range of the weak force supply evidence of electroweak unification in addition to evidence found at the particle scale.

Gluons ( ) are the proposed carrier particles for the strong nuclear force, although they are not directly observed. Like quarks, gluons may be confined to systems having a total color of white. Less is known about gluons than the fact that they are the carriers of the weak and certainly of the electromagnetic force. QCD theory calls for eight gluons, all massless and all spin 1. Six of the gluons carry a color and an anticolor, while two do not carry color, as illustrated in Figure 33.22(a). There is indirect evidence of the existence of gluons in nucleons. When high-energy electrons are scattered from nucleons and evidence of quarks is seen, the momenta of the quarks are smaller than they would be if there were no gluons. That means that the gluons carrying force between quarks also carry some momentum, inferred by the already indirect quark momentum measurements. At any rate, the gluons carry color charge and can change the colors of quarks when exchanged, as seen in Figure 33.22(b). In the figure, a red down quark interacts with a green strange quark by sending it a gluon. That gluon carries red away from the down quark and leaves it green, because it is an  (red-antigreen) gluon. (Taking antigreen away leaves you green.) Its antigreenness kills the green in the strange quark, and its redness turns the quark red.

The strong force is complicated, since observable particles that feel the strong force (hadrons) contain multiple quarks. Figure 33.23 shows the quark and gluon details of pion exchange between a proton and a neutron as illustrated earlier in Figure 33.3 and Figure 33.6. The quarks within the proton and neutron move along together exchanging gluons, until the proton and neutron get close together. As the  quark leaves the proton, a gluon creates a pair of virtual particles, a  quark and a  antiquark. The  quark stays behind and the proton turns into a neutron, while the  and  move together as a  (Table 33.4 confirms the composition for the  .) The  annihilates a  quark in the neutron, the  joins the neutron, and the neutron becomes a proton. A pion is exchanged and a force is transmitted.

It is beyond the scope of this text to go into more detail on the types of quark and gluon interactions that underlie the observable particles, but the theory (quantum chromodynamics or QCD) is very self-consistent. So successful have QCD and the electroweak theory been that, taken together, they are called the Standard Model. Advances in knowledge are expected to modify, but not overthrow, the Standard Model of particle physics and forces.

Making Connections: Unification of Forces

Grand Unified Theory (GUT) is successful in describing the four forces as distinct under normal circumstances, but connected in fundamental ways. Experiments have verified that the weak and electromagnetic force become identical at very small distances and provide the GUT description of the carrier particles for the forces. GUT

predicts that the other forces become identical under conditions so extreme that they cannot be tested in the laboratory, although there may be lingering evidence of them in the evolution of the universe. GUT is also successful in describing a system of carrier particles for all four forces, but there is much to be done, particularly in the realm of gravity.

How can forces be unified? They are definitely distinct under most circumstances, for example, being carried by different particles and having greatly different strengths. But experiments show that at extremely small distances, the strengths of the forces begin to become more similar. In fact, electroweak theory’s prediction of the  ,  , and  carrier particles was based on the strengths of the two forces being identical at extremely small distances as seen in Figure 33.24. As discussed in case of the creation of virtual particles for extremely short times, the small distances or short ranges correspond to the large masses of the carrier particles and the correspondingly large energies needed to create them. Thus, the energy scale on the horizontal axis of Figure 33.24 corresponds to smaller and smaller distances, with  corresponding to approximately,  for example. At that distance, the strengths of the EM and weak forces are the same. To test physics at that distance, energies of about 100 GeV must be put into the system, and that is sufficient to create and release the  ,  , and  carrier particles. At those and higher energies, the masses of the carrier particles becomes less and less relevant, and the  in particular resembles the massless, chargeless, spin 1 photon. In fact, there is enough energy when things are pushed to even smaller distances to transform the, and  into massless carrier particles more similar to photons and gluons. These have not been observed experimentally, but there is a prediction of an associated particle called the Higgs boson. The mass of this particle is not predicted with nearly the certainty with which the mass of the   and  particles were predicted, but it was hoped that the Higgs boson could be observed at the nowcanceled Superconducting Super Collider (SSC). Ongoing experiments at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN have presented some evidence for a Higgs boson with a mass of  , and there is a possibility of a direct discovery during 2012. The existence of this more massive particle would give validity to the theory that the carrier particles are identical under certain circumstances.

The small distances and high energies at which the electroweak force becomes identical with the strong nuclear force are not reachable with any conceivable human-built accelerator. At energies of about  (16,000 J per particle), distances of about  can be probed. Such energies are needed to test theory directly, but these are about  higher than the proposed giant SSC would have had, and the distances are about  smaller than any structure we have direct knowledge of. This would be the realm of various GUTs, of which there are many since there is no constraining evidence at these energies and distances. Past experience has shown that any time you probe so many orders of magnitude further (here, about  ), you find the unexpected. Even more extreme are the energies and distances at which gravity is thought to unify with the other forces in a TOE. Most speculative and least constrained by experiment are TOEs, one of which is called Superstring theory. Superstrings are entities that are  in scale and act like one-dimensional oscillating strings and are also proposed to underlie all particles, forces, and space itself.

At the energy of GUTs, the carrier particles of the weak force would become massless and identical to gluons. If that happens, then both lepton and baryon conservation would be violated. We do not see such violations, because we do not encounter such energies. However, there is a tiny probability that, at ordinary energies, the virtual particles that violate the conservation of baryon number may exist for extremely small amounts of time (corresponding to very small ranges). All GUTs thus predict that the proton should be unstable, but would decay with an extremely long lifetime of about  . The predicted decay mode is

which violates both conservation of baryon number and electron family number. Although  is an extremely long time (about  times the age of the universe), there are a lot of protons, and detectors have been constructed to look for the proposed decay mode as seen in Figure 33.25. It is somewhat comforting that proton decay has not been detected, and its experimental lifetime is now greater than  . This does not prove GUTs wrong, but it does place greater constraints on the theories, benefiting theorists in many ways.

From looking increasingly inward at smaller details for direct evidence of electroweak theory and GUTs, we turn around and look to the universe for evidence of the unification of forces. In the 1920s, the expansion of the universe was discovered. Thinking backward in time, the universe must once have been very small, dense, and extremely hot. At a tiny fraction of a second after the fabled Big Bang, forces would have been unified and may have left their fingerprint on the existing universe. This, one of the most exciting forefronts of physics, is the subject of Frontiers of Physics.

Glossary

baryon number a conserved physical quantity that is zero for mesons and leptons and  for baryons and antibaryons, respectively   
baryons hadrons that always decay to another baryon   
boson particle with zero or an integer value of intrinsic spin   
bottom a quark flavor   
charm a quark flavor, which is the counterpart of the strange quark   
colliding beams head-on collisions between particles moving in opposite directions   
color a quark flavor   
conservation of total baryon number a general rule based on the observation that the total number of nucleons was always conserved in nuclear reactions and decays   
conservation of total electron family number a general rule stating that the total electron family number stays the same through an interaction   
conservation of total muon family number a general rule stating that the total muon family number stays the same through an interaction   
cyclotron accelerator that uses fixed-frequency alternating electric fields and fixed magnets to accelerate particles in a circular spiral path   
down the second-lightest of all quarks   
electron family number the number  that is assigned to all members of the electron family, or the number 0 that is assigned to all particles not in the electron family   
electroweak theory theory showing connections between EM and weak forces   
fermion particle with a half-integer value of intrinsic spin   
Feynman diagram a graph of time versus position that describes the exchange of virtual particles between subatomic particles   
flavors quark type   
fundamental particle particle with no substructure   
gauge boson particle that carries one of the four forces   
gluons eight proposed particles which carry the strong force   
gluons exchange particles, analogous to the exchange of photons that gives rise to the electromagnetic force between two charged particles   
grand unified theory theory that shows unification of the strong and electroweak forces   
hadrons particles that feel the strong nuclear force   
Higgs boson a massive particle that, if observed, would give validity to the theory that carrier particles are identical under certain circumstances   
leptons particles that do not feel the strong nuclear force   
linear accelerator accelerator that accelerates particles in a straight line   
meson hadrons that can decay to leptons and leave no hadrons   
meson particle whose mass is intermediate between the electron and nucleon masses   
muon family number the number  that is assigned to all members of the muon family, or the number 0 that is assigned to all particles not in the muon family   
particle physics the study of and the quest for those truly fundamental particles having no substructure   
pion particle exchanged between nucleons, transmitting the force between them   
quantum chromodynamics quark theory including color   
quantum chromodynamics the governing theory of connecting quantum number color to gluons   
quantum electrodynamics the theory of electromagnetism on the particle scale   
quark an elementary particle and a fundamental constituent of matter   
standard model combination of quantum chromodynamics and electroweak theory   
strange the third lightest of all quarks   
strangeness a physical quantity assigned to various particles based on decay systematics   
superstring theory a theory of everything based on vibrating strings some  in length   
synchrotron a version of a cyclotron in which the frequency of the alternating voltage and the magnetic field strength are increased as the beam particles are accelerated   
synchrotron radiation radiation caused by a magnetic field accelerating a charged particle perpendicular to its velocity   
tau family number the number  that is assigned to all members of the tau family, or the number 0 that is assigned to all particles not in the tau family   
theory of quark confinement explains how quarks can exist and yet never be isolated or directly observed   
top a quark flavor   
up the lightest of all quarks   
Van de Graaff early accelerator: simple, large-scale version of the electron gun   
virtual particles particles which cannot be directly observed but their effects can be directly observed

Section Summary

33.1 The Yukawa Particle and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Revisited

• Yukawa’s idea of virtual particle exchange as the carrier of forces is crucial, with virtual particles being formed in temporary violation of the conservation of mass-energy as allowed by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.

33.2 The Four Basic Forces

• The four basic forces and their carrier particles are summarized in the Table 33.1.   
• Feynman diagrams are graphs of time versus position and are highly useful pictorial representations of particle processes.   
• The theory of electromagnetism on the particle scale is called quantum electrodynamics (QED).

33.3 Accelerators Create Matter from Energy

• A variety of particle accelerators have been used to explore the nature of subatomic particles and to test predictions of particle theories.   
• Modern accelerators used in particle physics are either large synchrotrons or linear accelerators.   
• The use of colliding beams makes much greater energy available for the creation of particles, and collisions between matter and antimatter allow a greater range of final products.

33.4 Particles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws

• All particles of matter have an antimatter counterpart that has the opposite charge and certain other quantum numbers as seen in Table 33.2. These matter-antimatter pairs are otherwise very similar but will annihilate when brought together. Known particles can be divided into three major groups—leptons, hadrons, and carrier particles (gauge bosons).   
• Leptons do not feel the strong nuclear force and are further divided into three groups—electron family designated by electron family number  ; muon family designated by muon family number  ; and tau family designated by tau family number  . The family numbers are not universally conserved due to neutrino oscillations.

• Hadrons are particles that feel the strong nuclear force and are divided into baryons, with the baryon family number  being conserved, and mesons.

33.5 Quarks: Is That All There Is?

• Hadrons are thought to be composed of quarks, with baryons having three quarks and mesons having a quark and an antiquark.   
• The characteristics of the six quarks and their antiquark counterparts are given in Table 33.3, and the quark compositions of certain hadrons are given in Table 33.4.   
• Indirect evidence for quarks is very strong, explaining all known hadrons and their quantum numbers, such as strangeness, charm, topness, and bottomness.   
• Quarks come in six flavors and three colors and occur only in combinations that produce white.   
• Fundamental particles have no further substructure, not even a size beyond their de Broglie wavelength.   
• There are three types of fundamental particles—leptons, quarks, and carrier particles. Each type is divided into three analogous families as indicated in Figure 33.20.

33.6 GUTs: The Unification of Forces

• Attempts to show unification of the four forces are called Grand Unified Theories (GUTs) and have been partially successful, with connections proven between EM and weak forces in electroweak theory.   
• The strong force is carried by eight proposed particles called gluons, which are intimately connected to a quantum number called color—their governing theory is thus called quantum chromodynamics (QCD). Taken together, QCD and the electroweak theory are widely accepted as the Standard Model of particle physics.   
Unification of the strong force is expected at such high energies that it cannot be directly tested, but it may have observable consequences in the asyet unobserved decay of the proton and topics to be discussed in the next chapter. Although unification of forces is generally anticipated, much remains to be done to prove its validity.

Conceptual Questions

33.3 Accelerators Create Matter from Energy

1. The total energy in the beam of an accelerator is far greater than the energy of the individual beam particles. Why isn’t this total energy available to create a single extremely massive particle?   
2. Synchrotron radiation takes energy from an accelerator beam and is related to acceleration. Why would you expect the problem to be more severe for electron accelerators than proton accelerators?   
3. What two major limitations prevent us from building high-energy accelerators that are physically small?   
4. What are the advantages of colliding-beam accelerators? What are the disadvantages?

33.4 Particles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws

5. Large quantities of antimatter isolated from normal matter should behave exactly like normal matter. An antiatom, for example, composed of positrons, antiprotons, and antineutrons should have the same atomic spectrum as its matter counterpart. Would you be able to tell it is antimatter by its emission of antiphotons? Explain briefly.   
6. Massless particles are not only neutral, they are chargeless (unlike the neutron). Why is this so?   
7. Massless particles must travel at the speed of light, while others cannot reach this speed. Why are all massless particles stable? If evidence is found that neutrinos spontaneously decay into other particles, would this imply they have mass?   
8. When a star erupts in a supernova explosion, huge numbers of electron neutrinos are formed in nuclear reactions. Such neutrinos from the 1987A supernova in the relatively nearby Magellanic Cloud were observed within hours of the initial brightening, indicating they traveled to earth at approximately the speed of light. Explain how this data can be used to set an upper limit on the mass of the neutrino, noting that if the mass is small the neutrinos could travel very close to the speed of light and have a reasonable energy (on the order of MeV).   
9. Theorists have had spectacular success in predicting previously unknown particles. Considering past theoretical triumphs, why should we bother to perform experiments?   
10. What lifetime do you expect for an antineutron isolated from normal matter?   
11. Why does the  meson have such a short lifetime compared to most other mesons?   
12. (a) Is a hadron always a baryon? (b) Is a baryon always a hadron? (c) Can an unstable baryon decay into a meson, leaving no other baryon?   
13. Explain how conservation of baryon number is responsible for conservation of total atomic mass (total number of nucleons) in nuclear decay and reactions.

33.5 Quarks: Is That All There Is?

14. The quark flavor change  takes place in  decay. Does this mean that the reverse quark flavor change  takes place in  decay? Justify your response by writing the decay in terms of the quark constituents, noting that it looks as if a proton is converted into a neutron in  decay.   
15. Explain how the weak force can change strangeness by changing quark flavor.   
16. Beta decay is caused by the weak force, as are all reactions in which strangeness changes. Does this imply that the weak force can change quark flavor? Explain.   
17. Why is it easier to see the properties of the c, b, and tquarks in mesons having composition  or  rather than in baryons having a mixture of quarks, such as udb?   
18. How can quarks, which are fermions, combine to form bosons? Why must an even number combine to form a boson? Give one example by stating the quark substructure of a boson.   
19. What evidence is cited to support the contention that the gluon force between quarks is greater than the strong nuclear force between hadrons? How is this related to color? Is it also related to quark confinement?   
20. Discuss how we know that  -mesons  are not fundamental particles and are not the basic carriers of the strong force.   
21. An antibaryon has three antiquarks with colors  . What is its color?   
22. Suppose leptons are created in a reaction. Does this imply the weak force is acting? (for example, consider  decay.)   
23. How can the lifetime of a particle indicate that its decay is caused by the strong nuclear force? How can a change in strangeness imply which force is responsible for a reaction? What does a change in quark flavor imply about the force that is responsible?   
24. (a) Do all particles having strangeness also have at least one strange quark in them? (b) Do all hadrons with a strange quark also have nonzero strangeness?   
25. The sigma-zero particle decays mostly via the reaction  . Explain how this decay and the respective quark compositions imply that the  is an excited state of the  .   
26. What do the quark compositions and other quantum numbers imply about the relationships between the  and the proton? The  and the neutron?

Problems & Exercises

33.1 The Yukawa Particle and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Revisited

1. A virtual particle having an approximate mass of  may be associated with the unification of the strong and electroweak forces. For what length of time could this virtual particle exist (in temporary violation of the conservation of mass-energy as allowed by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle)?   
2. Calculate the mass in  of a virtual carrier particle that has a range limited to  by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Such a particle might be involved in the unification of the strong and electroweak forces.   
3. Another component of the strong nuclear force is transmitted by the exchange of virtual  -mesons. Taking  -mesons to have an average mass of  , what is the approximate range of this component of the strong force?

33.2 The Four Basic Forces

4. (a) Find the ratio of the strengths of the weak and electromagnetic forces under ordinary circumstances. (b) What does that ratio become under circumstances in which the forces are unified?

27. Discuss the similarities and differences between the photon and the  in terms of particle properties, including forces felt.   
28. Identify evidence for electroweak unification.   
29. The quarks in a particle are confined, meaning individual quarks cannot be directly observed. Are gluons confined as well? Explain

33.6 GUTs: The Unification of Forces

30. If a GUT is proven, and the four forces are unified, it will still be correct to say that the orbit of the moon is determined by the gravitational force. Explain why.   
31. If the Higgs boson is discovered and found to have mass, will it be considered the ultimate carrier of the weak force? Explain your response.   
32. Gluons and the photon are massless. Does this imply that the  ,  , and  are the ultimate carriers of the weak force?

5. The ratio of the strong to the weak force and the ratio of the strong force to the electromagnetic force become 1 under circumstances where they are unified. What are the ratios of the strong force to those two forces under normal circumstances?

33.3 Accelerators Create Matter from Energy

6. At full energy, protons in the 2.00-km-diameter Fermilab synchrotron travel at nearly the speed of light, since their energy is about 1000 times their rest mass energy. (a) How long does it take for a proton to complete one trip around? (b) How many times per second will it pass through the target area?   
7. Suppose a  created in a bubble chamber lives for  What distance does it move in this time if it is traveling at  Since this distance is too short to make a track, the presence of the  must be inferred from its decay products. Note that the time is longer than the given  lifetime, which can be due to the statistical nature of decay or time dilation.   
8. What length track does a  traveling at  leave in a bubble chamber if it is created there and lives for  (Those moving faster or living longer may escape the detector before decaying.)   
9. The 3.20-km-long SLAC produces a beam of 50.0-GeV electrons. If there are 15,000 accelerating tubes, what average voltage must be across the gaps between them to achieve this energy?   
10. Because of energy loss due to synchrotron radiation in the LHC at CERN, only 5.00 MeV is added to the energy of each proton during each revolution around the main ring. How many revolutions are needed to produce 7.00-TeV (7000 GeV) protons, if they are injected with an initial energy of 8.00 GeV?   
11. A proton and an antiproton collide head-on, with each having a kinetic energy of 7.00 TeV (such as in the LHC at CERN). How much collision energy is available, taking into account the annihilation of the two masses? (Note that this is not significantly greater than the extremely relativistic kinetic energy.)   
12. When an electron and positron collide at the SLAC facility, they each have  kinetic energies. What is the total collision energy available, taking into account the annihilation energy? Note that the annihilation energy is insignificant, because the electrons are highly relativistic.

33.4 Particles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws

13. The  is its own antiparticle and decays in the following manner:  . What is the energy of each ray if the  is at rest when it decays?

14. The primary decay mode for the negative pion is  . What is the energy release in MeV in this decay?

15. The mass of a theoretical particle that may be associated with the unification of the electroweak and strong forces is  . (a) How many proton masses is this? (b) How many electron masses is this? (This indicates how extremely relativistic the accelerator would have to be in order to make the particle, and how large the relativistic quantity would have to be.)

16. The decay mode of the negative muon is  . (a) Find the energy released in MeV. (b) Verify that charge and lepton family numbers are conserved.

17. The decay mode of the positive tau is  . (a) What energy is released? (b) Verify that charge and lepton family numbers are conserved. (c) The  is the antiparticle of the  .Verify that all the decay products of the  are the antiparticles of those in the decay of the  given in the text.

18. The principal decay mode of the sigma zero is  . (a) What energy is released? (b) Considering the quark structure of the two baryons, does it appear that the  is an excited state of the ? (c) Verify that strangeness, charge, and baryon number are conserved in the decay. (d) Considering the preceding and the short lifetime, can the weak force be responsible? State why or why not.   
19. (a) What is the uncertainty in the energy released in the decay of a  due to its short lifetime? (b) What fraction of the decay energy is this, noting that the decay mode is  (so that all the  mass is destroyed)?   
20. (a) What is the uncertainty in the energy released in the decay of a  due to its short lifetime? (b) Is the uncertainty in this energy greater than or less than the uncertainty in the mass of the tau neutrino? Discuss the source of the uncertainty.

33.5 Quarks: Is That All There Is?

21. (a) Verify from its quark composition that the  particle could be an excited state of the proton. (b) There is a spread of about  in the decay energy of the  , interpreted as uncertainty due to its short lifetime. What is its approximate lifetime? (c) Does its decay proceed via the strong or weak force?

22. Accelerators such as the Triangle Universities Meson Facility (TRIUMF) in British Columbia produce secondary beams of pions by having an intense primary proton beam strike a target. Such “meson factories” have been used for many years to study the interaction of pions with nuclei and, hence, the strong nuclear force. One reaction that occurs is  , where the  is a very short-lived particle. The graph in Figure 33.26 shows the probability of this reaction as a function of energy. The width of the bump is the uncertainty in energy due to the short lifetime of the  . (a) Find this lifetime. (b) Verify from the quark composition of the particles that this reaction annihilates and then re-creates a  quark and a  antiquark by writing the reaction and decay in terms of quarks. (c) Draw a Feynman diagram of the production and decay of the  showing the individual quarks involved.

23. The reaction  (described in the preceding problem) takes place via the strong force. (a) What is the baryon number of the  particle? (b) Draw a Feynman diagram of the reaction showing the individual quarks involved.

24. One of the decay modes of the omega minus is  . (a) What is the change in strangeness? (b) Verify that baryon number and charge are conserved, while lepton numbers are unaffected. (c) Write the equation in terms of the constituent quarks, indicating that the weak force is responsible.

25. Repeat the previous problem for the decay mode 

26. One decay mode for the eta-zero meson is  (a) Find the energy released. (b) What is the uncertainty in the energy due to the short lifetime? (c) Write the decay in terms of the constituent quarks. (d) Verify that baryon number, lepton numbers, and charge are conserved.

27. One decay mode for the eta-zero meson is  . (a) Write the decay in terms of the quark constituents. (b) How much energy is released? (c) What is the ultimate release of energy, given the decay mode for the pi zero is 

28. Is the decay  possible considering the appropriate conservation laws? State why or why not.

29. Is the decay  possible considering the appropriate conservation laws? State why or why not.

30. (a) Is the decay  possible considering the appropriate conservation laws? State why or why not. (b) Write the decay in terms of the quark constituents of the particles.

31. (a) Is the decay  possible considering the appropriate conservation laws? State why or why not. (b) Write the decay in terms of the quark constituents of the particles.

32. The only combination of quark colors that produces a white baryon is RGB. Identify all the color combinations that can produce a white meson.

33. (a) Three quarks form a baryon. How many combinations of the six known quarks are there if all combinations are possible? (b) This number is less than the number of known baryons. Explain why.

34. (a) Show that the conjectured decay of the proton,  , violates conservation of baryon number and conservation of lepton number. (b) What is the analogous decay process for the antiproton?

35. Verify the quantum numbers given for the  in Table 33.2 by adding the quantum numbers for its quark constituents as inferred from Table 33.4.

36. Verify the quantum numbers given for the proton and neutron in Table 33.2 by adding the quantum numbers for their quark constituents as given in Table 33.4.

37. (a) How much energy would be released if the proton did decay via the conjectured reaction  (b) Given that the  decays to two s and that the  will find an electron to annihilate, what total energy is ultimately produced in proton decay? (c) Why is this energy greater than the proton’s total mass (converted to energy)?

38. (a) Find the charge, baryon number, strangeness, charm, and bottomness of the  particle from its quark composition. (b) Do the same for the  particle.   
39. There are particles called  -mesons. One of them is the  meson, which has a single positive charge and a baryon number of zero, also the value of its strangeness, topness, and bottomness. It has a charm of  What is its quark configuration?   
40. There are particles called bottom mesons or  -mesons. One of them is the  meson, which has a single negative charge; its baryon number is zero, as are its strangeness, charm, and topness. It has a bottomness of . What is its quark configuration?   
41. (a) What particle has the quark composition ? (b) What should its decay mode be?   
42. (a) Show that all combinations of three quarks produce integral charges. Thus baryons must have integral charge. (b) Show that all combinations of a quark and an antiquark produce only integral charges. Thus mesons must have integral charge.

33.6 GUTs: The Unification of Forces

43. Integrated Concepts

The intensity of cosmic ray radiation decreases rapidly with increasing energy, but there are occasionally extremely energetic cosmic rays that create a shower of radiation from all the particles they create by striking a nucleus in the atmosphere as seen in the figure given below. Suppose a cosmic ray particle having an energy of converts its energy into particles with masses averaging  . (a) How many particles are created? (b) If the particles rain down on a  area, how many particles are there per square meter?

44. Integrated Concepts Assuming conservation of momentum, what is the energy of each ray produced in the decay of a neutral at rest pion, in the reaction 

45. Integrated Concepts What is the wavelength of a 50-GeV electron, which is produced at SLAC? This provides an idea of the limit to the detail it can probe.

46. Integrated Concepts (a) Calculate the relativistic quantity  for 1.00-TeV protons produced at Fermilab. (b) If such a proton created a  having the same speed, how long would its life be in the laboratory? (c) How far could it travel in this time?

47. Integrated Concepts

The primary decay mode for the negative pion is  . (a) What is the energy release in MeV in this decay? (b) Using conservation of momentum, how much energy does each of the decay products receive, given the  is at rest when it decays? You may assume the muon antineutrino is massless and has momentum  , just like a photon.

48. Integrated Concepts Plans for an accelerator that produces a secondary beam of  -mesons to scatter from nuclei, for the purpose of studying the strong force, call for them to have a kinetic energy of 500 MeV. (a) What would the relativistic quantity  be for these particles? (b) How long would their average lifetime be in the laboratory? (c) How far could they travel in this time?

49. Integrated Concepts Suppose you are designing a proton decay experiment and you can detect 50 percent of the proton decays in a tank of water. (a) How many kilograms of water would you need to see one decay per month, assuming a lifetime of  ? (b) How many cubic meters of water is this? (c) If the actual lifetime is  , how long would you have to wait on an average to see a single proton decay?

50. Integrated Concepts In supernovas, neutrinos are produced in huge amounts. They were detected from the 1987A supernova in the Magellanic Cloud, which is about 120,000 light years away from the Earth (relatively close to our Milky Way galaxy). If neutrinos have a mass, they cannot travel at the speed of light, but if their mass is small, they can get close. (a) Suppose a neutrino with a  mass has a kinetic energy of  Find the relativistic quantity  for it. (b) If the neutrino leaves the 1987A supernova at the same time as a photon and both travel to Earth, how much sooner does the photon arrive? This is not a large time difference, given that it is impossible to know which neutrino left with which photon and the poor efficiency of the neutrino detectors. Thus, the fact that neutrinos were observed within hours of the brightening of the supernova only places an upper limit on the neutrino’s mass. (Hint: You may need to use a series expansion to find vfor the neutrino, since its is so large.)

51. Construct Your Own Problem

Consider an ultrahigh-energy cosmic ray entering the Earth’s atmosphere (some have energies approaching a joule). Construct a problem in which you calculate the energy of the particle based on the number of particles in an observed cosmic ray shower. Among the things to consider are the average mass of the shower particles, the average number per square meter, and the extent (number of square meters covered) of the shower. Express the energy in eV and joules.

52. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a detector needed to observe the proposed, but extremely rare, decay of an electron. Construct a problem in which you calculate the amount of matter needed in the detector to be able to observe the decay, assuming that it has a signature that is clearly identifiable. Among the things to consider are the estimated half life (long for rare events), and the number of decays per unit time that you wish to observe, as well as the number of electrons in the detector substance.

53. Critical Thinking (a) How much mass is converted to energy when a proton and antiproton annihilate each other? (b) How much energy is produced in the conversion above? (c) If energy were to produce a proton-antiproton pair, how much energy would this take? (d) What characteristic other than one being antimatter is different for a proton and an antiproton?