11.5 Colloids

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the composition and properties of colloidal dispersions • List and explain several technological applications of colloids

As a child, you may have made suspensions such as mixtures of mud and water, flour and water, or a suspension of solid pigments in water, known as tempera paint. These suspensions are heterogeneous mixtures composed of relatively large particles that are visible (or that can be seen with a magnifying glass). They are cloudy, and the suspended particles settle out after mixing. On the other hand, a solution is a homogeneous mixture in which no settling occurs and in which the dissolved species are molecules or ions. Solutions exhibit completely different behavior from suspensions. A solution may be colored, but it is transparent, the molecules or ions are invisible, and they do not settle out on standing. Another class of mixtures called colloids (or colloidal dispersions) exhibit properties intermediate between those of suspensions and solutions (Figure 11.29). The particles in a colloid are larger than most simple molecules;

however, colloidal particles are small enough that they do not settle out upon standing.

The particles in a colloid are large enough to scatter light, a phenomenon called the Tyndall effect. This can make colloidal mixtures appear cloudy or opaque, such as the searchlight beams shown in Figure 11.30. Clouds are colloidal mixtures. They are composed of water droplets that are much larger than molecules, but that are small enough that they do not settle out.

The term “colloid”—from the Greek words kola, meaning “glue,” and eidos, meaning “like”—was first used in 1861 by Thomas Graham to classify mixtures such as starch in water and gelatin. Many colloidal particles are aggregates of hundreds or thousands of molecules, but others (such as proteins and polymer molecules) consist of a single extremely large molecule. The protein and synthetic polymer molecules that form colloids may have molecular masses ranging from a few thousand to many million atomic mass units.

Analogous to the identification of solution components as “solute” and “solvent,” the components of a colloid are likewise classified according to their relative amounts. The particulate component typically present in a relatively minor amount is called the dispersed phase and the substance or solution throughout which the particulate is dispersed is called the dispersion medium. Colloids may involve virtually any combination of physical states (gas in liquid, liquid in solid, solid in gas, etc.), as illustrated by the examples of colloidal systems given in Table 11.4.

Examples of Colloidal Systems

Preparation of Colloidal Systems

Colloids are prepared by producing particles of colloidal dimensions and distributing these particles throughout a dispersion medium. Particles of colloidal size are formed by two methods:

1. Dispersion methods: breaking down larger particles. For example, paint pigments are produced by dispersing large particles by grinding in special mills.   
2. Condensation methods: growth from smaller units, such as molecules or ions. For example, clouds form when water molecules condense and form very small droplets.

A few solid substances, when brought into contact with water, disperse spontaneously and form colloidal systems. Gelatin, glue, starch, and dehydrated milk powder behave in this manner. The particles are already of colloidal size; the water simply disperses them. Powdered milk particles of colloidal size are produced by dehydrating milk spray. Some atomizers produce colloidal dispersions of a liquid in air.

An emulsion may be prepared by shaking together or blending two immiscible liquids. This breaks one liquid into droplets of colloidal size, which then disperse throughout the other liquid. Oil spills in the ocean may be difficult to clean up, partly because wave action can cause the oil and water to form an emulsion. In many emulsions, however, the dispersed phase tends to coalesce, form large drops, and separate. Therefore, emulsions are usually stabilized by an emulsifying agent, a substance that inhibits the coalescence of the dispersed liquid. For example, a little soap will stabilize an emulsion of kerosene in water. Milk is an emulsion of butterfat in water, with the protein casein serving as the emulsifying agent. Mayonnaise is an emulsion of oil in vinegar, with egg yolk components as the emulsifying agents.

Condensation methods form colloidal particles by aggregation of molecules or ions. If the particles grow beyond the colloidal size range, drops or precipitates form, and no colloidal system results. Clouds form when water molecules aggregate and form colloid-sized particles. If these water particles coalesce to form adequately large water drops of liquid water or crystals of solid water, they settle from the sky as rain, sleet, or snow. Many condensation methods involve chemical reactions. A red colloidal suspension of iron(III) hydroxide may be prepared by mixing a concentrated solution of iron(III) chloride with hot water:

A colloidal gold sol results from the reduction of a very dilute solution of gold(III) chloride by a reducing agent such as formaldehyde, tin(II) chloride, or iron(II) sulfate:

Some gold sols prepared in 1857 are still intact (the particles have not coalesced and settled), illustrating the long-term stability of many colloids.

Soaps and Detergents

Pioneers made soap by boiling fats with a strongly basic solution made by leaching potassium carbonate,  , from wood ashes with hot water. Animal fats contain polyesters of fatty acids (long-chain carboxylic acids). When animal fats are treated with a base like potassium carbonate or sodium hydroxide, glycerol and salts of fatty acids such as palmitic, oleic, and stearic acid are formed. The salts of fatty acids are called soaps. The sodium salt of stearic acid, sodium stearate, has the formula  and contains an uncharged nonpolar hydrocarbon chain, the  unit, and an ionic carboxylate group, the  unit (Figure 11.31).

Detergents(soap substitutes) also contain nonpolar hydrocarbon chains, such as  , and an ionic group, such as a sulfate—  or a sulfonate—  (Figure 11.32). Soaps form insoluble calcium and magnesium compounds in hard water; detergents form water-soluble products—a definite advantage for detergents.

The cleaning action of soaps and detergents can be explained in terms of the structures of the molecules involved. The hydrocarbon (nonpolar) end of a soap or detergent molecule dissolves in, or is attracted to, nonpolar substances such as oil, grease, or dirt particles. The ionic end is attracted by water (polar), illustrated in Figure 11.33. As a result, the soap or detergent molecules become oriented at the interface between the dirt particles and the water so they act as a kind of bridge between two different kinds of matter, nonpolar and polar. Molecules such as this are termed amphiphilic since they have both a hydrophobic (“water-fearing”) part and a hydrophilic (“water-loving”) part. As a consequence, dirt particles become suspended as colloidal particles and are readily washed away.

Chemistry in Everyday Life

Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill

The blowout of the Deepwater Horizon oil drilling rig on April 20, 2010, in the Gulf of Mexico near Mississippi began the largest marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry. In the 87 days following the blowout, an estimated 4.9 million barrels (210 million gallons) of oil flowed from the ruptured well 5000 feet below the water’s surface. The well was finally declared sealed on September 19, 2010.

Crude oil is immiscible with and less dense than water, so the spilled oil rose to the surface of the water.

Floating booms, skimmer ships, and controlled burns were used to remove oil from the water’s surface in an attempt to protect beaches and wetlands along the Gulf coast. In addition to removal of the oil, attempts were also made to lessen its environmental impact by rendering it “soluble” (in the loose sense of the term) and thus allowing it to be diluted to hopefully less harmful levels by the vast volume of ocean water. This approach used 1.84 million gallons of the oil dispersant Corexit 9527, most of which was injected underwater at the site of the leak, with small amounts being sprayed on top of the spill. Corexit 9527 contains 2-butoxyethanol  , an amphiphilic molecule whose polar and nonpolar ends are useful for emulsifying oil into small droplets, increasing the surface area of the oil and making it more available to marine bacteria for digestion (Figure 11.34). While this approach avoids many of the immediate hazards that bulk oil poses to marine and coastal ecosystems, it introduces the possibility of long-term effects resulting from the introduction of the complex and potential toxic components of petroleum into the ocean’s food chain. A number of organizations are involved in monitoring the extended impact of this oil spill, including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/16gulfspill) for additional details).

Electrical Properties of Colloidal Particles

Dispersed colloidal particles are often electrically charged. A colloidal particle of iron(III) hydroxide, for example, does not contain enough hydroxide ions to compensate exactly for the positive charges on the iron(III) ions. Thus, each individual colloidal particle bears a positive charge, and the colloidal dispersion consists of charged colloidal particles and some free hydroxide ions, which keep the dispersion electrically neutral. Most metal hydroxide colloids have positive charges, whereas most metals and metal sulfides form negatively charged dispersions. All colloidal particles in any one system have charges of the same sign. This helps keep them dispersed because particles containing like charges repel each other.

The charged nature of some colloidal particles may be exploited to remove them from a variety of mixtures. For example, the particles comprising smoke are often colloidally dispersed and electrically charged. Frederick Cottrell, an American chemist, developed a process to remove these particles. The charged particles are attracted to highly charged electrodes, where they are neutralized and deposited as dust (Figure 11.36). This is one of the important methods used to clean up the smoke from a variety of industrial processes. The process is also important in the recovery of valuable products from the smoke and flue dust of smelters, furnaces, and kilns. There are also similar electrostatic air filters designed for home use to improve indoor air quality.

Portrait of a Chemist

Frederick Gardner Cottrell

Born in Oakland, CA, in 1877, Frederick Cottrell devoured textbooks as if they were novels and graduated from high school at the age of 16. He then entered the University of California (UC), Berkeley, completing a Bachelor’s degree in three years. He saved money from his  1200$ annual salary as a chemistry teacher at Oakland High School to fund his studies in chemistry in Berlin with Nobel prize winner Jacobus Henricus van’t Hoff, and in Leipzig with Wilhelm Ostwald, another Nobel awardee. After earning his PhD in physical chemistry, he returned to the United States to teach at UC Berkeley. He also consulted for the DuPont Company, where he developed the electrostatic precipitator, a device designed to curb air pollution by removing colloidal particles from air. Cottrell used the proceeds from his invention to fund a nonprofit research corporation to finance scientific research.

Gels

Gelatin desserts, such as Jell-O, are a type of colloid (Figure 11.37). Gelatin sets on cooling because the hot aqueous mixture of gelatin coagulates as it cools, yielding an extremely viscous body known as a gel. A gel is a colloidal dispersion of a liquid phase throughout a solid phase. It appears that the fibers of the dispersing medium form a complex three-dimensional network, the interstices being filled with the liquid medium or a dilute solution of the dispersing medium.

Pectin, a carbohydrate from fruit juices, is a gel-forming substance important in jelly making. Silica gel, a colloidal dispersion of hydrated silicon dioxide, is formed when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to a dilute solution of sodium silicate. Canned Heat is a flammable gel made by mixing alcohol and a saturated aqueous solution of calcium acetate.

Key Terms

alloy solid mixture of a metallic element and one or more additional elements   
amphiphilic molecules possessing both hydrophobic (nonpolar) and a hydrophilic (polar) parts   
boiling point elevation elevation of the boiling point of a liquid by addition of a solute   
boiling point elevation constant the proportionality constant in the equation relating boiling point elevation to solute molality; also known as the ebullioscopic constant   
colligative property property of a solution that depends only on the concentration of a solute species   
colloid (also, colloidal dispersion) mixture in which relatively large solid or liquid particles are dispersed uniformly throughout a gas, liquid, or solid   
crenation process whereby biological cells become shriveled due to loss of water by osmosis   
dispersed phase substance present as relatively large solid or liquid particles in a colloid   
dispersion medium solid, liquid, or gas in which colloidal particles are dispersed   
dissociation physical process accompanying the dissolution of an ionic compound in which the compound’s constituent ions are solvated and dispersed throughout the solution   
electrolyte substance that produces ions when dissolved in water   
emulsifying agent amphiphilic substance used to stabilize the particles of some emulsions   
emulsion colloid formed from immiscible liquids   
freezing point depression lowering of the freezing point of a liquid by addition of a solute   
freezing point depression constant (also, cryoscopic constant) proportionality constant in the equation relating freezing point depression to solute molality   
gel colloidal dispersion of a liquid in a solid   
hemolysis rupture of red blood cells due to the accumulation of excess water by osmosis   
Henry’s law the proportional relationship between the concentration of dissolved gas in a solution and the partial pressure of the gas in contact with the solution   
hypertonic of greater osmotic pressure   
hypotonic of less osmotic pressure   
ideal solution solution that forms with no accompanying energy change   
immiscible of negligible mutual solubility; typically refers to liquid substances   
ion pair solvated anion/cation pair held together by moderate electrostatic attraction   
ion-dipole attraction electrostatic attraction between an ion and a polar molecule   
isotonic of equal osmotic pressure   
miscible mutually soluble in all proportions; typically refers to liquid substances   
molality  a concentration unit defined as the ratio of the numbers of moles of solute to the mass of the solvent in kilograms   
nonelectrolyte substance that does not produce ions when dissolved in water   
osmosis diffusion of solvent molecules through a semipermeable membrane   
osmotic pressure  opposing pressure required to prevent bulk transfer of solvent molecules through a semipermeable membrane   
partially miscible of moderate mutual solubility; typically refers to liquid substances   
Raoult’s law the relationship between a solution’s vapor pressure and the vapor pressures and concentrations of its components   
saturated of concentration equal to solubility; containing the maximum concentration of solute possible for a given temperature and pressure   
semipermeable membrane a membrane that selectively permits passage of certain ions or molecules   
solubility extent to which a solute may be dissolved in water, or any solvent   
solvation exothermic process in which intermolecular attractive forces between the solute and solvent in a solution are established   
spontaneous process physical or chemical change that occurs without the addition of energy from an external source   
strong electrolyte substance that dissociates or ionizes completely when dissolved in water   
supersaturated of concentration that exceeds solubility; a nonequilibrium state   
suspension heterogeneous mixture in which relatively large component particles are temporarily dispersed but settle out over time   
Tyndall effect scattering of visible light by a colloidal dispersion   
unsaturated of concentration less than solubility   
van’t Hoff factor (i) the ratio of the number of moles of particles in a solution to the number of moles of formula units dissolved in the solution   
weak electrolyte substance that ionizes only partially when dissolved in water

Key Equations

Summary

11.1 The Dissolution Process

A solution forms when two or more substances combine physically to yield a mixture that is homogeneous at the molecular level. The solvent is the most concentrated component and determines the physical state of the solution. The solutes are the other components typically present at concentrations less than that of the solvent. Solutions may form endothermically or exothermically, depending upon the relative magnitudes of solute and solvent intermolecular attractive forces. Ideal solutions form with no appreciable change in energy.

11.2 Electrolytes

Substances that dissolve in water to yield ions are called electrolytes. Electrolytes may be covalent compounds that chemically react with water to produce ions (for example, acids and bases), or they may be ionic compounds that dissociate to yield their constituent cations and anions, when dissolved. Dissolution of an ionic compound is facilitated by ion-dipole attractions between the ions of the compound and the polar water molecules. Soluble ionic substances and strong acids ionize completely and are strong electrolytes, while weak acids and bases ionize to only a small extent and are weak electrolytes. Nonelectrolytes are substances that do not produce ions when dissolved in water.

11.3 Solubility

The extent to which one substance will dissolve in another is determined by several factors, including the types and relative strengths of intermolecular attractive forces that may exist between the substances’ atoms, ions, or molecules. This tendency to dissolve is quantified as a substance’s solubility, its maximum concentration in a solution at equilibrium under specified conditions. A

saturated solution contains solute at a concentration equal to its solubility. A supersaturated solution is one in which a solute’s concentration exceeds its solubility—a nonequilibrium (unstable) condition that will result in solute precipitation when the solution is appropriately perturbed. Miscible liquids are soluble in all proportions, and immiscible liquids exhibit very low mutual solubility. Solubilities for gaseous solutes decrease with increasing temperature, while those for most, but not all, solid solutes increase with temperature. The concentration of a gaseous solute in a solution is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas to which the solution is exposed, a relation known as Henry’s law.

11.4 Colligative Properties

Properties of a solution that depend only on the concentration of solute particles are called colligative properties. They include changes in the vapor pressure, boiling point, and freezing point of the solvent in the solution. The magnitudes of these properties depend only on the total concentration of solute particles in solution, not on the type of particles. The total concentration of solute particles in a solution also determines its osmotic pressure. This is the pressure that must be applied to the solution to prevent diffusion of molecules of pure solvent through a semipermeable membrane into the solution. Ionic compounds may not completely dissociate in solution due to activity effects, in which case observed colligative effects may be less than predicted.

11.5 Colloids

Colloids are mixtures in which one or more substances are dispersed as relatively large solid particles or liquid droplets throughout a solid, liquid, or gaseous medium. The particles of a colloid remain dispersed and do not settle due to gravity,

and they are often electrically charged. Colloids are technological applications. widespread in nature and are involved in many

Exercises

11.1 The Dissolution Process

1. How do solutions differ from compounds? From other mixtures?   
2. Which of the principal characteristics of solutions are evident in the solutions of  shown in Figure 11.2?   
3. When  is dissolved in water, the resulting solution is significantly colder than the water was originally. (a) Is the dissolution of  an endothermic or an exothermic process? (b) What conclusions can you draw about the intermolecular attractions involved in the process? (c) Is the resulting solution an ideal solution?

4. Give an example of each of the following types of solutions: (a) a gas in a liquid (b) a gas in a gas (c) a solid in a solid

5. Indicate the most important types of intermolecular attractions in each of the following solutions: (a) The solution in Figure 11.2. (b)  in  (c)  in  (d)  in benzene  (e) Methanol  in 

6. Predict whether each of the following substances would be more soluble in water (polar solvent) or in a hydrocarbon such as heptane  , nonpolar solvent): (a) vegetable oil (nonpolar) (b) isopropyl alcohol (polar) (c) potassium bromide (ionic)

7. Heat is released when some solutions form; heat is absorbed when other solutions form. Provide a molecular explanation for the difference between these two types of spontaneous processes.

8. Solutions of hydrogen in palladium may be formed by exposing Pd metal to  gas. The concentration of hydrogen in the palladium depends on the pressure of  gas applied, but in a more complex fashion than can be described by Henry’s law. Under certain conditions,  of hydrogen gas is dissolved in  of palladium metal (solution density  ).

(a) Determine the molarity of this solution.   
(b) Determine the molality of this solution.   
(c) Determine the percent by mass of hydrogen atoms in this solution.

11.2 Electrolytes

9. Explain why the ions  and  are strongly solvated in water but not in hexane, a solvent composed of nonpolar molecules.   
10. Explain why solutions of HBr in benzene (a nonpolar solvent) are nonconductive, while solutions in water (a polar solvent) are conductive.

11. Consider the solutions presented: (a) Which of the following sketches best represents the ions in a solution of 

(b) Write a balanced chemical equation showing the products of the dissolution of  . 12. Compare the processes that occur when methanol  , hydrogen chloride (HCl), and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolve in water. Write equations and prepare sketches showing the form in which each of these compounds is present in its respective solution.

13. What is the expected electrical conductivity of the following solutions? (a) NaOH(aq) (b) HCl(aq) (c)  (glucose) (d) 

14. Why are most solidionic compounds electrically nonconductive, whereas aqueous solutions of ionic compounds are good conductors? Would you expect a liquid(molten) ionic compound to be electrically conductive or nonconductive? Explain.

15. Indicate the most important type of intermolecular attraction responsible for solvation in each of the following solutions: (a) the solutions in Figure 11.7 (b) methanol,  , dissolved in ethanol,  (c) methane,  , dissolved in benzene,  (d) the polar halocarbon  dissolved in the polar halocarbon  (e)  in 

11.3 Solubility

16. Suppose you are presented with a clear solution of sodium thiosulfate,  . How could you determine whether the solution is unsaturated, saturated, or supersaturated?

17. Supersaturated solutions of most solids in water are prepared by cooling saturated solutions. Supersaturated solutions of most gases in water are prepared by heating saturated solutions. Explain the reasons for the difference in the two procedures.   
18. Suggest an explanation for the observations that ethanol,  , is completely miscible with water and that ethanethiol,  , is soluble only to the extent of  per  of water.   
19. Calculate the percent by mass of KBr in a saturated solution of KBr in water at  See Figure 11.16 for useful data, and report the computed percentage to one significant digit.   
20. Which of the following gases is expected to be most soluble in water? Explain your reasoning. (a)  (b)  (c) 

21. At  and 1.00 atm, as much as  of  can dissolve in 1 L of water. At  and 4.00 atm, how many grams of  dissolve in  of water?

22. Refer to Figure 11.10.

(a) How did the concentration of dissolved  in the beverage change when the bottle was opened?   
(b) What caused this change?   
(c) Is the beverage unsaturated, saturated, or supersaturated with  ?

23. The Henry’s law constant for  is  at  . Assuming ideal solution behavior, what pressure of carbon dioxide is needed to maintain a  concentration of  in a can of lemon-lime soda?

24. The Henry’s law constant for  is  at  Assuming ideal solution behavior, what mass of oxygen would be dissolved in a  aquarium at  , assuming an atmospheric pressure of 1.00 atm, and that the partial pressure of  is 0.21 atm?

25. Assuming ideal solution behavior, how many liters of HCl gas, measured at  and 745 torr, are required to prepare  of a  solution of hydrochloric acid?

11.4 Colligative Properties

26. Which is/are part of the macroscopic domain of solutions and which is/are part of the microscopic domain: boiling point elevation, Henry’s law, hydrogen bond, ion-dipole attraction, molarity, nonelectrolyte, nonstoichiometric compound, osmosis, solvated ion?

27. What is the microscopic explanation for the macroscopic behavior illustrated in Figure 11.14?

28. Sketch a qualitative graph of the pressure versus time for water vapor above a sample of pure water and a sugar solution, as the liquids evaporate to half their original volume.

29. A solution of potassium nitrate, an electrolyte, and a solution of glycerin  , a nonelectrolyte, both boil at  What other physical properties of the two solutions are identical?

30. What are the mole fractions of  and water in a solution of  of  in  of water? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.

31. What are the mole fractions of  and water in a concentrated solution of nitric acid  by mass)? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.

32. Calculate the mole fraction of each solute and solvent: (a)  of  in  of water—the acid solution used in an automobile battery (b)  of NaCl in  of water—a solution of sodium chloride for intravenous injection (c)  of codeine,  , in  of ethanol,  (d)  of  in  of ethanol, 

33. Calculate the mole fraction of each solute and solvent: (a)  of sodium carbonate (washing soda),  , in  of water—a saturated solution at  (b)  of  in  of water—a mixture used to make an instant ice pack (c)  of  in  of dichloromethane,  (d)  of tetrahydropyridine,  , in  of chloroform, 

34. Calculate the mole fractions of methanol,  ; ethanol,  ; and water in a solution that is  methanol,  ethanol, and  water by mass. (Assume the data are good to two significant figures.)

35. What is the difference between a 1  solution and a  solution?

36. What is the molality of phosphoric acid,  , in a solution of  of  in  of water? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.

37. What is the molality of nitric acid in a concentrated solution of nitric acid  by mass)? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.

38. Calculate the molality of each of the following solutions: (a)  of  in  of water—the acid solution used in an automobile battery (b)  of NaCl in  of water—a solution of sodium chloride for intravenous injection (c)  of codeine,  , in  of ethanol,  (d)  of  in  of ethanol, 

39. Calculate the molality of each of the following solutions:

(a)  of sodium carbonate (washing soda),  , in  of water—a saturated solution at    
(b)  of  in  of water—a mixture used to make an instant ice pack   
(c)  of  in  of dichloromethane,    
(d)  of tetrahydropyridine,  , in  of chloroform, 

40. The concentration of glucose,  , in normal spinal fluid is What is the molality of the solution?

41. A  solution of  by mass has a density of  . Calculate the molality of the solution.

42. Why does  of sodium chloride depress the freezing point of  of water almost twice as much as 1 mol of glycerin?

43. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the boiling point of a solution of  of nonvolatile sucrose,  , in  of water? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question (b) Answer the question

44. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the boiling point of a solution of  of  in  of benzene, assuming the  is nonvolatile? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.

45. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing temperature of a solution of  of sucrose,  , in  of water? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.

46. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing point of a solution of  of  in  of benzene? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question. (b) Answer the question.

47. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the osmotic pressure of an aqueous solution of  of  in water at  The volume of the solution is  . (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.

48. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is osmotic pressure of a solution of bovine insulin (molar mass,  at  if  of the solution contains  of the insulin? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.

49. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molar mass of a solution of  of a compound in  of carbon tetrachloride (bp  ;  that boils at  at 1 atm? (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Solve the problem.

50. A sample of an organic compound (a nonelectrolyte) weighing  lowered the freezing point of  of benzene by  . Assuming ideal solution behavior, calculate the molar mass of the compound.

51. A  solution of HCl in benzene has a freezing point of  . Is HCl an electrolyte in benzene? Explain

52. A solution contains  of urea,  , a nonvolatile compound, dissolved in  of water. If the vapor pressure of pure water at  is 23.7 torr, what is the vapor pressure of the solution (assuming ideal solution behavior)?

53. A 12.0-  sample of a nonelectrolyte is dissolved in  of water. The solution freezes at  .

54. Arrange the following solutions in order by their decreasing freezing points:   ,  NaCl, and  .

55. Calculate the boiling point elevation of  of water containing  of NaCl,  of  , and  of  , assuming complete dissociation of these electrolytes and ideal solution behavior.

56. How could you prepare a  aqueous solution of glycerin,  Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing point of this solution?

57. A sample of sulfur weighing  was dissolved in  of carbon disulfide,  . If the boiling point elevation was  , what is the formula of a sulfur molecule in carbon disulfide (assuming ideal solution behavior)?

58. In a significant experiment performed many years ago, 5.6977 g of cadmium iodide in  of water raised the boiling point  . What does this suggest about the nature of a solution of  ?

59. Lysozyme is an enzyme that cleaves cell walls. A 0.100-L sample of a solution of lysozyme that contains  of the enzyme exhibits an osmotic pressure of  atm at  . Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molar mass of lysozyme?

60. The osmotic pressure of a solution containing  of insulin per liter is 23 torr at  . Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molar mass of insulin?

61. The osmotic pressure of human blood is 7.6 atm at  . What mass of glucose,  , is required to make  of aqueous solution for intravenous feeding if the solution must have the same osmotic pressure as blood at body temperature,  (assuming ideal solution behavior)?

62. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing point of a solution of dibromobenzene,  , in  of benzene, if the solution boils at 

63. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the boiling point of a solution of NaCl in water if the solution freezes at 

64. The sugar fructose contains  C,  , and  O by mass. A solution of  of fructose in 325 g of ethanol has a boiling point of  The boiling point of ethanol is  , and  for ethanol is  . Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molecular formula of fructose?

65. The vapor pressure of methanol,  , is 94 torr at  . The vapor pressure of ethanol,  , is 44 torr at the same temperature. (a) Calculate the mole fraction of methanol and of ethanol in a solution of  of methanol and  of ethanol. (b) Ethanol and methanol form a solution that behaves like an ideal solution. Calculate the vapor pressure of methanol and of ethanol above the solution at  . (c) Calculate the mole fraction of methanol and of ethanol in the vapor above the solution.

66. The triple point of air-free water is defined as 273.16 K. Why is it important that the water be free of a

67. Meat can be classified as fresh (not frozen) even though it is stored at  Why wouldn’t meat freeze at this temperature?

68. An organic compound has a composition of  C and  by mass. A solution of  of this compound in  of camphor melts at  . The melting point of pure camphor is  .  for camphor is  . Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molecular formula of the solute? Show your calculations.

69. A sample of  weighing  is dissolved in  of ethanol,   . The boiling point elevation of the solution is  Is  an electrolyte in ethanol? Show your calculations.

70. A salt is known to be an alkali metal fluoride. A quick approximate determination of freezing point indicates that  of the salt dissolved in  of water produces a solution that freezes at about  Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the formula of the salt? Show your calculations.

11.5 Colloids

71. Identify the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium in each of the following colloidal systems: starch dispersion, smoke, fog, pearl, whipped cream, floating soap, jelly, milk, and ruby.

2. Distinguish between dispersion methods and condensation methods for preparing colloidal systems.

3. How do colloids differ from solutions with regard to dispersed particle size and homogeneity?

74. Explain the cleansing action of soap.

75. How can it be demonstrated that colloidal particles are electrically charged?