7.3 Trigonometric Substitutions

The most power?ful tool we have, for integrating with pencil and paper and brain, is the method of substitution. To make it work, we have to think of good substitutions— which make the integral simpler. This section concentrates on the single most valuable collectionaof substitutions. They are the only ones you should memorize, and two examples aregiven imÑmediately.

To integrate  ; substitute  : Do not set 

The expression  is awkward as a function of  : It becomes graceful as a function of  : We are practically invited to use the equation  : Then the square root is simply cos  —provided this cosine is positive.

Notice the change in  . When  is sin  ;  is cos  . Figure  shows the original area with new letters. Figure 7.4b shows an equal area, after rewriting  as  : Changing from  to  gives a new height and a new base. There is no change in area—that is the point of substitution.

To put it bluntly: If we go from  to cos  ; and forget the difference between  and  ; and just compute  ; the answer is totally wrong.

We still need the integral of  : This was Example 3 of integration by parts, and also equation 7:2:6. It is worth memorizing. The example shows this  integral, and returns to  :

EXAMPLE 1  sin  cos  is after substitution

We changed sin  back to  and cos  to  : Notice that  is  . The answer is trickier than you might expect for the area under a circular arc. Figure 7.5 shows how the two pieces of the integral are the areas of?a pie-shaped wedge and a triangle.

EXAMPLE 2

Remember: We already know  : Its derivative  was computed in Section 4.4. That solves the example. But instead of matching this special problem

with a memory from Chapter 4, the substitution  makes the solution automatic. From  we go back to  :

The rest of this section is about other substitutions. They are more complicated than  (but closely related). A table will display the three main choices— sin  ; tan  ; sec  —and their uses.

TRIGONOMETRIC SUBSTITUTIONS

After workingwith  ; the next step is  : The change  simplified the first, but it does nothing for the second:  is not familiar. Nevertheless a factor of 2 makes everything work. Instead of  ; the idea is to substitute  :

Notice both 2’s.The integral is  cos  : But watch closely.   
This is not 4 times the previous  is now  .

Based on  and  ; here is the general rule for  : Substitute  sin  : Then the  ’s separate out:

That is the automatic substitution to try, whenever the square root appears.

EXAMPLE 4

Here  : Then  and  : The integral has  above and below, so it is  : The antiderivative is just  : For the definite integral notice that  means sin  ; and this means  :

A table of integrals would hide that substitution. The table only gives  : There is no mention of  : But what if  changes to 

EXAMPLE 5

Notice the two changes—the sign in the square root and the limits on  : Example 4 stayed inside the interval  ; where  has a square root. Example 5 stays

outside, where  has a square root. The new problem cannot use  sin  ; because we don’t want the square root of  :

The new substitution is  . This turns the square root into 4 ta?n  :

 gives  sec  tan  d and 

This substitution solves the example, when the limits are changed to  :

I want to emphasize the three steps. First came the substitution  : An unrecognizable integral became  : Second came the new limits (  when  when  ). Then I integrated sec  :

Example 6 has the same  : So the substitution is again  sec  :

EXAMPLE 6

Step one substitutes  : Step two changes the limits to  : The upper limit  becomes  ; where the secant is infinite. The limit  again means  : To get a grip on the integral, I also changed to sines and cosines.

The integral of cos  needs another substitution!  else recognize cot  csc  :) With  we have  :

Solution

Warning With lower limit  (or  ) this integral would be a disaster. It divides by sin»0; which is zero. This area is in»finite.

.Warning/2 Example 5 also blew up at  ; but the area was not infinite. To make the point directly, compare  to  : Both blow?up at  ; but the first one has finite area:

Section 7.5 separates finite areas (slow growth of  from infinite areas (fast growth of x 3=2).

Last substitution Toge»the8r with  »and  comes the possibility  : (You might ask about  ; but for obvious reasons we don’t take its square root.) This third form  requires a third substitution  tan  : Then  : Here is an example:

EXAMPLE 7

Note There is a subtle difference between changing  to sin  and changing sin  to  :

in Example 1,  was replaced by cos  (new method)

in Example 6, cos  was already there and became  (old method):

The combination cos  was put into the first and pulled out of the second.

My point is that Chapter 5 needed  inside the integral. Then  became  : Now it is not necessary to see so far ahead. We can try any substitution. If it works, we win. In this section,  or sec  or tan  is bound to succeed.

We mention the hyperbolic substitutions tanh  ; and cosh  : The table below shows their use. They give new forms for the same integrals. If you are familiar with hyperbolic functions the new form might look simpler—as it does in Example 8.

EX?AMPLE 8

 is simple. The bad part is  at the end. Compare with  :

This way looks harder, but most tables prefer that final logarithm. It is clearer than  ; even if it takes more space. All answers agree if Problem 35 is correct.

COMPLETING THE SQUARE

We have not said what to do for  or  : Those square roots contain a linear term—a multiple of  : The device for removing linear terms is worth knowing. It is called completing the square, and two examples will begin to explain it:

The idea has three steps. First, get the  and  terms into one square. Here that square was  : Sec?ond, fix up the c?onstant term. He?re we recover the original functions by adding 1: Third, set  to leave no linear term. Then the integral goes forward based on the substitutions of this section:

7.3 Trigonometric Substitutions

The same idea applies to any quadratic that contains a linear term  :

To match the quadratic with» the square, we fix u»p the constant:

EXAMPLE 9

Here  and  : Now comes a choice—struggle on with  sec  or look for  inside the front cover. Then set  :

Note If the quadrati»c starts with  or  ; factor out»the 5 first:

Now  produces  : This is ready for table lookup or  tan  :

EXAMPLE 10

This answer is  : Now go backwards:   : Nobody could see that from the start. A double substitution takes practice, from  to  to  : Then go backwards from  to  to  :

Final remark For  we substitute  tan  we substitute   sec  : This big dividing line depends on whether the constant  (after completing the square) is positive or negative. We either have  or  : The same dividing line in the original  is between  and  : In between,  yields the perfect square  — and no trigonometric substitution at all.