12.7 Catalysis

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain the function of a catalyst in terms of reaction mechanisms and potential energy diagrams • List examples of catalysis in natural and industrial processes

Among the factors affecting chemical reaction rates discussed earlier in this chapter was the presence of a catalyst, a substance that can increase the reaction rate without being consumed in the reaction. The concepts introduced in the previous section on reaction mechanisms provide the basis for understanding how catalysts are able to accomplish this very important function.

Figure 12.19 shows reaction diagrams for a chemical process in the absence and presence of a catalyst. Inspection of the diagrams reveals several traits of these reactions. Consistent with the fact that the two diagrams represent the same overall reaction, both curves begin and end at the same energies (in this case, because products are more energetic than reactants, the reaction is endothermic). The reaction mechanisms, however, are clearly different. The uncatalyzed reaction proceeds via a one-step mechanism (one transition state observed), whereas the catalyzed reaction follows a two-step mechanism (two transition states observed) with anotablyles eractivationenergy. This difference illustrates the means by which a catalyst functions to accelerate reactions, namely, by providing an alternative reaction mechanism with a lower activation energy. Although the catalyzed reaction mechanism for a reaction needn’t necessarily involve a different number of steps than the uncatalyzed mechanism, it must provide a reaction path whose rate determining step is faster (lower  ).

EXAMPLE 12.15

Reaction Diagrams for Catalyzed Reactions

The two reaction diagrams here represent the same reaction: one without a catalyst and one with a catalyst.   
Estimate the activation energy for each process, and identify which one involves a catalyst.

Solution

Activation energies are calculated by subtracting the reactant energy from the transition state energy.

The catalyzed reaction is the one with lesser activation energy, in this case represented by diagram b.

Check Your Learning

Reaction diagrams for a chemical process with and without a catalyst are shown below. Both reactions involve a two-step mechanism with a rate-determining first step. Compute activation energies for the first step of each mechanism, and identify which corresponds to the catalyzed reaction. How do the second steps of these two mechanisms compare?

Answer:

For the first step,  for (a) and  for (b), so diagram (b) depicts the catalyzed reaction. Activation energies for the second steps of both mechanisms are the same,  .

Homogeneous Catalysts

A homogeneous catalyst is present in the same phase as the reactants. It interacts with a reactant to form an intermediate substance, which then decomposes or reacts with another reactant in one or more steps to regenerate the original catalyst and form product.

As an important illustration of homogeneous catalysis, consider the earth’s ozone layer. Ozone in the upper atmosphere, which protects the earth from ultraviolet radiation, is formed when oxygen molecules absorb ultraviolet light and undergo the reaction:

Ozone is a relatively unstable molecule that decomposes to yield diatomic oxygen by the reverse of this

equation. This decomposition reaction is consistent with the following two-step mechanism:

A number of substances can catalyze the decomposition of ozone. For example, the nitric oxide–catalyzed decomposition of ozone is believed to occur via the following three-step mechanism:

As required, the overall reaction is the same for both the two-step uncatalyzed mechanism and the three-step NO-catalyzed mechanism:

Notice that NO is a reactant in the first step of the mechanism and a product in the last step. This is another characteristic trait of a catalyst: Though it participates in the chemical reaction, it is not consumed by the reaction.

Portrait of a Chemist

Mario J. Molina

The 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was shared by Paul J. Crutzen, Mario J. Molina (Figure 12.20), and F. Sherwood Rowland “for their work in atmospheric chemistry, particularly concerning the formation and decomposition of ozone.”1 Molina, a Mexican citizen, carried out the majority of his work at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).

In 1974, Molina and Rowland published a paper in the journal Naturedetailing the threat of chlorofluorocarbon gases to the stability of the ozone layer in earth’s upper atmosphere. The ozone layer protects earth from solar radiation by absorbing ultraviolet light. As chemical reactions deplete the amount of ozone in the upper atmosphere, a measurable “hole” forms above Antarctica, and an increase in the

amount of solar ultraviolet radiation— strongly linked to the prevalence of skin cancers—reaches earth’s surface. The work of Molina and Rowland was instrumental in the adoption of the Montreal Protocol, an international treaty signed in 1987 that successfully began phasing out production of chemicals linked to ozone destruction.

Molina and Rowland demonstrated that chlorine atoms from human-made chemicals can catalyze ozone destruction in a process similar to that by which NO accelerates the depletion of ozone. Chlorine atoms are generated when chlorocarbons or chlorofluorocarbons—once widely used as refrigerants and propellants—are photochemically decomposed by ultraviolet light or react with hydroxyl radicals. A sample mechanism is shown here using methyl chloride:

Chlorine radicals break down ozone and are regenerated by the following catalytic cycle:

A single monatomic chlorine can break down thousands of ozone molecules. Luckily, the majority of atmospheric chlorine exists as the catalytically inactive forms  and  .

Since receiving his portion of the Nobel Prize, Molina has continued his work in atmospheric chemistry at MIT.

HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT

Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency

Enzymes in the human body act as catalysts for important chemical reactions in cellular metabolism. As such, a deficiency of a particular enzyme can translate to a life-threatening disease. G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase) deficiency, a genetic condition that results in a shortage of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, is the most common enzyme deficiency in humans. This enzyme, shown in Figure 12.21, is the rate-limiting enzyme for the metabolic pathway that supplies NADPH to cells (Figure 12.22).

A disruption in this pathway can lead to reduced glutathione in red blood cells; once all glutathione is consumed, enzymes and other proteins such as hemoglobin are susceptible to damage. For example, hemoglobin can be metabolized to bilirubin, which leads to jaundice, a condition that can become severe. People who suffer from G6PD deficiency must avoid certain foods and medicines containing chemicals that can trigger damage their glutathione-deficient red blood cells.

Heterogeneous Catalysts

A heterogeneous catalyst is a catalyst that is present in a different phase (usually a solid) than the reactants. Such catalysts generally function by furnishing an active surface upon which a reaction can occur. Gas and liquid phase reactions catalyzed by heterogeneous catalysts occur on the surface of the catalyst rather than within the gas or liquid phase.

Heterogeneous catalysis typically involves the following processes:

1. Adsorption of the reactant(s) onto the surface of the catalyst   
2. Activation of the adsorbed reactant(s)   
3. Reaction of the adsorbed reactant(s)   
4. Desorption of product(s) from the surface of the catalyst

Figure 12.23 illustrates the steps of a mechanism for the reaction of compounds containing a carbon–carbon double bond with hydrogen on a nickel catalyst. Nickel is the catalyst used in the hydrogenation of polyunsaturated fats and oils (which contain several carbon–carbon double bonds) to produce saturated fats and oils (which contain only carbon–carbon single bonds).

Many important chemical products are prepared via industrial processes that use heterogeneous catalysts, including ammonia, nitric acid, sulfuric acid, and methanol. Heterogeneous catalysts are also used in the catalytic converters found on most gasoline-powered automobiles (Figure 12.24).

Chemistry in Everyday Life

Automobile Catalytic Converters

Scientists developed catalytic converters to reduce the amount of toxic emissions produced by burning gasoline in internal combustion engines. By utilizing a carefully selected blend of catalytically active metals, it is possible to effect complete combustion of all carbon-containing compounds to carbon dioxide while also reducing the output of nitrogen oxides. This is particularly impressive when we consider that one step involves adding more oxygen to the molecule and the other involves removing the oxygen (Figure 12.24).

Most modern, three-way catalytic converters possess a surface impregnated with a platinum-rhodium catalyst, which catalyzes the conversion of nitric oxide into dinitrogen and oxygen as well as the conversion of carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons such as octane into carbon dioxide and water vapor:

In order to be as efficient as possible, most catalytic converters are preheated by an electric heater. This ensures that the metals in the catalyst are fully active even before the automobile exhaust is hot enough to maintain appropriate reaction temperatures.

LINK TO LEARNING

The University of California at Davis’ “ChemWiki” provides a thorough explanation (http://openstax.org/l/ 16catconvert) of how catalytic converters work.

HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT

Enzyme Structure and Function

The study of enzymes is an important interconnection between biology and chemistry. Enzymes are usually proteins (polypeptides) that help to control the rate of chemical reactions between biologically important compounds, particularly those that are involved in cellular metabolism. Different classes of enzymes perform a variety of functions, as shown in Table 12.3.

Enzyme molecules possess an active site, a part of the molecule with a shape that allows it to bond to a specific substrate (a reactant molecule), forming an enzyme-substrate complex as a reaction intermediate. There are two models that attempt to explain how this active site works. The most simplistic model is referred to as the lock-and-key hypothesis, which suggests that the molecular shapes of the active site and substrate are complementary, fitting together like a key in a lock. The induced fit hypothesis, on the other hand, suggests that the enzyme molecule is flexible and changes shape to accommodate a bond with the substrate. This is not to suggest that an enzyme’s active site is completely malleable, however. Both the lock-and-key model and the induced fit model account for the fact that enzymes can only bind with specific substrates, since in general a particular enzyme only catalyzes a particular reaction (Figure 12.25).

LINK TO LEARNING

The Royal Society of Chemistry (http://openstax.org/l/16enzymes) provides an excellent introduction to enzymes for students and teachers.

Key Terms

activated complex (also, transition state) unstable combination of reactant species formed during a chemical reaction   
activation energy  minimum energy necessary in order for a reaction to take place   
Arrhenius equation mathematical relationship between a reaction’s rate constant, activation energy, and temperature   
average rate rate of a chemical reaction computed as the ratio of a measured change in amount or concentration of substance to the time interval over which the change occurred   
bimolecular reaction elementary reaction involving two reactant species   
catalyst substance that increases the rate of a reaction without itself being consumed by the reaction   
collision theory model that emphasizes the energy and orientation of molecular collisions to explain and predict reaction kinetics   
elementary reaction reaction that takes place in a single step, precisely as depicted in its chemical equation   
frequency factor (A) proportionality constant in the Arrhenius equation, related to the relative number of collisions having an orientation capable of leading to product formation   
half-life of a reaction  time required for half of a given amount of reactant to be consumed   
heterogeneous catalyst catalyst present in a different phase from the reactants, furnishing a surface at which a reaction can occur   
homogeneous catalyst catalyst present in the same phase as the reactants   
initial rate instantaneous rate of a chemical reaction at  s (immediately after the reaction has begun)   
instantaneous rate rate of a chemical reaction at any instant in time, determined by the slope of the line tangential to a graph of concentration as a function of time   
integrated rate law equation that relates the concentration of a reactant to elapsed time of reaction   
intermediate species produced in one step of a reaction mechanism and consumed in a subsequent step   
method of initial rates common experimental approach to determining rate laws that involves measuring reaction rates at varying initial reactant concentrations   
molecularity number of reactant species involved in an elementary reaction   
overall reaction order sum of the reaction orders for each substance represented in the rate law   
rate constant (k) proportionality constant in a rate law   
rate expression mathematical representation defining reaction rate as change in amount, concentration, or pressure of reactant or product species per unit time   
rate law (also, rate equation) (also, differential rate laws) mathematical equation showing the dependence of reaction rate on the rate constant and the concentration of one or more reactants   
rate of reaction measure of the speed at which a chemical reaction takes place   
rate-determining step (also, rate-limiting step) slowest elementary reaction in a reaction mechanism; determines the rate of the overall reaction   
reaction diagram used in chemical kinetics to illustrate various properties of a reaction   
reaction mechanism stepwise sequence of elementary reactions by which a chemical change takes place   
reaction order value of an exponent in a rate law (for example, zero order for 0, first order for 1, second order for 2, and so on)   
termolecular reaction elementary reaction involving three reactant species   
unimolecular reaction elementary reaction involving a single reactant species

Key Equations

relative reaction rates for  integrated rate law for zero-order reactions:  ， half-life for a zero-order reaction  integrated rate law for first-order reactions:  ， half-life for a first-order reaction 

integrated rate law for second-order reactions:  half-life for a second-order reaction 

Summary

12.1 Chemical Reaction Rates

The rate of a reaction can be expressed either in terms of the decrease in the amount of a reactant or the increase in the amount of a product per unit time. Relations between different rate expressions for a given reaction are derived directly from the stoichiometric coefficients of the equation representing the reaction.

12.2 Factors Affecting Reaction Rates

The rate of a chemical reaction is affected by several parameters. Reactions involving two phases proceed more rapidly when there is greater surface area contact. If temperature or reactant concentration is increased, the rate of a given reaction generally increases as well. A catalyst can increase the rate of a reaction by providing an alternative pathway with a lower activation energy.

12.3 Rate Laws

Rate laws (diferentialratelaws) provide a mathematical description of how changes in the concentration of a substance affect the rate of a chemical reaction. Rate laws are determined experimentally and cannot be predicted by reaction stoichiometry. The order of reaction describes how much a change in the concentration of each substance affects the overall rate, and the overall order of a reaction is the sum of the orders for each substance present in the reaction. Reaction orders are typically first order, second order, or zero order, but fractional and even negative orders are possible.

12.4 Integrated Rate Laws

Integrated rate laws are mathematically derived from differential rate laws, and they describe the time dependence of reactant and product concentrations.

The half-life of a reaction is the time required to decrease the amount of a given reactant by one-half. A reaction’s half-life varies with rate constant and,

for some reaction orders, reactant concentration. The half-life of a zero-order reaction decreases as the initial concentration of the reactant in the reaction decreases. The half-life of a first-order reaction is independent of concentration, and the half-life of a second-order reaction decreases as the concentration increases.

12.5 Collision Theory

Chemical reactions typically require collisions between reactant species. These reactant collisions must be of proper orientation and sufficient energy in order to result in product formation. Collision theory provides a simple but effective explanation for the effect of many experimental parameters on reaction rates. The Arrhenius equation describes the relation between a reaction’s rate constant, activation energy, temperature, and dependence on collision orientation.

12.6 Reaction Mechanisms

The sequence of individual steps, or elementary reactions, by which reactants are converted into products during the course of a reaction is called the reaction mechanism. The molecularity of an elementary reaction is the number of reactant species involved, typically one (unimolecular), two (bimolecular), or, less commonly, three (termolecular). The overall rate of a reaction is determined by the rate of the slowest in its mechanism, called the rate-determining step. Unimolecular elementary reactions have first-order rate laws, while bimolecular elementary reactions have second-order rate laws. By comparing the rate laws derived from a reaction mechanism to that determined experimentally, the mechanism may be deemed either incorrect or plausible.

12.7 Catalysis

Catalysts affect the rate of a chemical reaction by altering its mechanism to provide a lower activation energy. Catalysts can be homogenous (in the same

phase as the reactants) or heterogeneous (a different phase than the reactants).

Exercises

12.1 Chemical Reaction Rates

1. What is the difference between average rate, initial rate, and instantaneous rate?   
2. Ozone decomposes to oxygen according to the equation  Write the equation that relates the rate expressions for this reaction in terms of the disappearance of  and the formation of oxygen.   
3. In the nuclear industry, chlorine trifluoride is used to prepare uranium hexafluoride, a volatile compound of uranium used in the separation of uranium isotopes. Chlorine trifluoride is prepared by the reaction  Write the equation that relates the rate expressions for this reaction in terms of the disappearance of  and  and the formation of  .

4. A study of the rate of dimerization of  gave the data shown in the table: 

(a) Determine the average rate of dimerization between 0 s and 1600 s, and between 1600 s and  . (b) Estimate the instantaneous rate of dimerization at 3200 s from a graph of time versus  . What are the units of this rate?   
(c) Determine the average rate of formation of  at 1600 s and the instantaneous rate of formation at 3200 s from the rates found in parts (a) and (b).

5. A study of the rate of the reaction represented as  gave the following data:

(a) Determine the average rate of disappearance of  between 0.0 s and  , and between 10.0 s and  . (b) Estimate the instantaneous rate of disappearance of  at 15.0 s from a graph of time versus [A]. What are the units of this rate?   
(c) Use the rates found in parts (a) and (b) to determine the average rate of formation of  between 0.00 s and  , and the instantaneous rate of formation of  at  .

6. Consider the following reaction in aqueous solution:  If the rate of disappearance of  at a particular moment during the reaction is  , what is the rate of appearance of  at that moment?

12.2 Factors Affecting Reaction Rates

7. Describe the effect of each of the following on the rate of the reaction of magnesium metal with a solution of hydrochloric acid: the molarity of the hydrochloric acid, the temperature of the solution, and the size of the pieces of magnesium.   
8. Explain why an egg cooks more slowly in boiling water in Denver than in New York City. (Hint: Consider the effect of temperature on reaction rate and the effect of pressure on boiling point.)

9. Go to the PhET Reactions & Rates (http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction) interactive. Use the Single Collision tab to represent how the collision between monatomic oxygen (O) and carbon monoxide (CO) results in the breaking of one bond and the formation of another. Pull back on the red plunger to release the atom and observe the results. Then, click on “Reload Launcher” and change to “Angled shot” to see the difference. (a) What happens when the angle of the collision is changed? (b) Explain how this is relevant to rate of reaction.

10. In the PhET Reactions & Rates (http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction) interactive, use the “Many Collisions” tab to observe how multiple atoms and molecules interact under varying conditions. Select a molecule to pump into the chamber. Set the initial temperature and select the current amounts of each reactant. Select “Show bonds” under Options. How is the rate of the reaction affected by concentration and temperature?

11. In the PhET Reactions & Rates (http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction) interactive, on the Many Collisions tab, set up a simulation with 15 molecules of A and 10 molecules of BC. Select “Show Bonds” under Options. (a) Leave the Initial Temperature at the default setting. Observe the reaction. Is the rate of reaction fast or slow? (b) Click “Pause” and then “Reset All,” and then enter 15 molecules of A and 10 molecules of BC once again. Select “Show Bonds” under Options. This time, increase the initial temperature until, on the graph, the total average energy line is completely above the potential energy curve. Describe what happens to the reaction.

12.3 Rate Laws

12. How do the rate of a reaction and its rate constant differ?

13. Doubling the concentration of a reactant increases the rate of a reaction four times. With this knowledge, answer the following questions: (a) What is the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant? (b) Tripling the concentration of a different reactant increases the rate of a reaction three times. What is the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant?

14. Tripling the concentration of a reactant increases the rate of a reaction nine-fold. With this knowledge, answer the following questions: (a) What is the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant? (b) Increasing the concentration of a reactant by a factor of four increases the rate of a reaction four-fold. What is the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant?

15. How will the rate of reaction change for the process:  if the rate law for the reaction is  ？ (a) Decreasing the pressure of  from 0.50 atm to 0.250 atm. (b) Increasing the concentration of CO from 0.01  to  .

16. How will each of the following affect the rate of the reaction:  if the rate law for the reaction is   [CO]? (a) Increasing the pressure of  from 0.1 atm to 0.3 atm (b) Increasing the concentration of CO from  to  .

17. Regular flights of supersonic aircraft in the stratosphere are of concern because such aircraft produce nitric oxide, NO, as a byproduct in the exhaust of their engines. Nitric oxide reacts with ozone, and it has been suggested that this could contribute to depletion of the ozone layer. The reaction  is first order with respect to both NO and  with a rate constant of   . What is the instantaneous rate of disappearance of NO when  and  

18. Radioactive phosphorus is used in the study of biochemical reaction mechanisms because phosphorus atoms are components of many biochemical molecules. The location of the phosphorus (and the location of the molecule it is bound in) can be detected from the electrons (beta particles) it produces:  rate  What is the instantaneous rate of production of electrons in a sample with a phosphorus concentration of 

19. The rate constant for the radioactive decay of  is  . The products of the decay are nitrogen atoms and electrons (beta particles):

   
rate    
What is the instantaneous rate of production of N atoms in a sample with a carbon-14 content of    


20. The decomposition of acetaldehyde is a second order reaction with a rate constant of   . What is the instantaneous rate of decomposition of acetaldehyde in a solution with a concentration of 

21. Alcohol is removed from the bloodstream by a series of metabolic reactions. The first reaction produces acetaldehyde; then other products are formed. The following data have been determined for the rate at which alcohol is removed from the blood of an average male, although individual rates can vary by  . Women metabolize alcohol a little more slowly than men:

Determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the overall order for this reaction.

22. Under certain conditions the decomposition of ammonia on a metal surface gives the following data:

Determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the overall order for this reaction.

23. Nitrosyl chloride, NOCl, decomposes to NO and  .  Determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the overall order for this reaction from the following data:

24. From the following data, determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the order with respect to  for the reaction  .

25. Nitrogen monoxide reacts with chlorine according to the equation:  The following initial rates of reaction have been observed for certain reactant concentrations:

What is the rate law that describes the rate’s dependence on the concentrations of NO and  What is the rate constant? What are the orders with respect to each reactant?

26. Hydrogen reacts with nitrogen monoxide to form dinitrogen monoxide (laughing gas) according to the equation:  Determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the orders with respect to each reactant from the following data:

27. For the reaction  the following data were obtained at  :

(a) What is the order of the reaction with respect to [A], and what is the rate law? (b) What is the rate constant?

28. For the reaction  the following data were obtained at  :

(a) What is the order of the reaction with respect to  , and what is the rate law? (b) What is the rate constant?

29. The rate constant for the first-order decomposition at  of dinitrogen pentoxide,  , dissolved in chloroform,  , is  .  What is the rate of the reaction when 

30. The annual production of  in 2013 was 60 million metric tons Most of that was prepared by the following sequence of reactions, each run in a separate reaction vessel. (a)  (b)  (c)  The first reaction is run by burning ammonia in air over a platinum catalyst. This reaction is fast. The reaction in equation (c) is also fast. The second reaction limits the rate at which nitric acid can be prepared from ammonia. If equation (b) is second order in NO and first order in  , what is the rate of formation of  when the oxygen concentration is  and the nitric oxide concentration is  The rate constant for the reaction is  .

31. The following data have been determined for the reaction: 

Determine the rate law and the rate constant for this reaction.

12.4 Integrated Rate Laws

32. Describe how graphical methods can be used to determine the order of a reaction and its rate constant from a series of data that includes the concentration of  at varying times.

33. Use the data provided to graphically determine the order and rate constant of the following reaction: 

34. Pure ozone decomposes slowly to oxygen,  Use the data provided in a graphical method and determine the order and rate constant of the reaction.

35. From the given data, use a graphical method to determine the order and rate constant of the following reaction:

2X→Y+Z

36. What is the half-life for the first-order decay of phosphorus-32?  The rate constant for the decay is  .

37. What is the half-life for the first-order decay of carbon-14?  The rate constant for the decay is  .

38. What is the half-life for the decomposition of NOCl when the concentration of NOCl is 0.15  The rate constant for this second-order reaction is  .

39. What is the half-life for the decomposition of  when the concentration of  is  The rate constant for this second-order reaction is  .

40. The reaction of compound  to give compounds  and  was found to be second-order in  . The rate constant for the reaction was determined to be  . If the initial concentration is  , what is the value of  ?

41. The half-life of a reaction of compound  to give compounds  and  is  when the initial concentration of  is 0.150 M. How long will it take for the concentration to drop to  if the reaction is (a) first order with respect to  or (b) second order with respect to 

42. Some bacteria are resistant to the antibiotic penicillin because they produce penicillinase, an enzyme with a molecular weight of  that converts penicillin into inactive molecules. Although the kinetics of enzyme-catalyzed reactions can be complex, at low concentrations this reaction can be described by a rate law that is first order in the catalyst (penicillinase) and that also involves the concentration of penicillin. From the following data:  of a solution containing 0.15 µg  of penicillinase, determine the order of the reaction with respect to penicillin and the value of the rate constant.

43. Both technetium-99 and thallium-201 are used to image heart muscle in patients with suspected heart problems. The half-lives are  and  , respectively. What percent of the radioactivity would remain for each of the isotopes after 2 days (48 h)?

44. There are two molecules with the formula  . Propene,  is the monomer of the polymer polypropylene, which is used for indoor-outdoor carpets. Cyclopropane is used as an anesthetic:

When heated to  , cyclopropane rearranges (isomerizes) and forms propene with a rate constant of  . What is the half-life of this reaction? What fraction of the cyclopropane remains after 0.75 h at 

45. Fluorine-18 is a radioactive isotope that decays by positron emission to form oxygen-18 with a half-life of  . (A positron is a particle with the mass of an electron and a single unit of positive charge; the equation is  Physicians use  to study the brain by injecting a quantity of fluorosubstituted glucose into the blood of a patient. The glucose accumulates in the regions where the brain is active and needs nourishment.

(a) What is the rate constant for the decomposition of fluorine-18?   
(b) If a sample of glucose containing radioactive fluorine-18 is injected into the blood, what percent of the   
radioactivity will remain after 5.59 h?   
(c) How long does it take for  of the  to decay?

46. Suppose that the half-life of steroids taken by an athlete is 42 days. Assuming that the steroids biodegrade by a first-order process, how long would it take for  of the initial dose to remain in the athlete’s body?

47. Recently, the skeleton of King Richard III was found under a parking lot in England. If tissue samples from the skeleton contain about  of the carbon-14 expected in living tissue, what year did King Richard III die? The half-life for carbon-14 is 5730 years.

48. Nitroglycerine is an extremely sensitive explosive. In a series of carefully controlled experiments, samples of the explosive were heated to  and their first-order decomposition studied. Determine the average rate constants for each experiment using the following data:

49. For the past 10 years, the unsaturated hydrocarbon 1,3-butadiene  has ranked 38th among the top 50 industrial chemicals. It is used primarily for the manufacture of synthetic rubber. An isomer exists also as cyclobutene:

The isomerization of cyclobutene to butadiene is first-order and the rate constant has been measured as  at  in a  flask. Determine the partial pressure of cyclobutene and its concentration after 30.0 minutes if an isomerization reaction is carried out at  with an initial pressure of 55 torr.

12.5 Collision Theory

50. Chemical reactions occur when reactants collide. What are two factors that may prevent a collision from producing a chemical reaction?   
51. When every collision between reactants leads to a reaction, what determines the rate at which the reaction occurs?   
52. What is the activation energy of a reaction, and how is this energy related to the activated complex of the reaction?   
53. Account for the relationship between the rate of a reaction and its activation energy.   
54. Describe how graphical methods can be used to determine the activation energy of a reaction from a series of data that includes the rate of reaction at varying temperatures.   
55. How does an increase in temperature affect rate of reaction? Explain this effect in terms of the collision theory of the reaction rate.

56. The rate of a certain reaction doubles for every  rise in temperature.

(a) How much faster does the reaction proceed at  than at  (b) How much faster does the reaction proceed at  than at 

57. In an experiment, a sample of  was  decomposed in  . Approximately how long would this decomposition have taken if the sample had been heated  higher? (Hint: Assume the rate doubles for each  rise in temperature.)

58. The rate constant at  for the decomposition reaction  is  , and the activation energy is  per mole of  . Determine the frequency factor for the reaction.

59. The rate constant for the decomposition of acetaldehyde,  , to methane,  , and carbon monoxide, CO, in the gas phase is  at  and  at  . Determine the activation energy for this decomposition.

60. An elevated level of the enzyme alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in human serum is an indication of possible liver or bone disorder. The level of serum ALP is so low that it is very difficult to measure directly. However, ALP catalyzes a number of reactions, and its relative concentration can be determined by measuring the rate of one of these reactions under controlled conditions. One such reaction is the conversion of p-nitrophenyl phosphate (PNPP) to p-nitrophenoxide ion (PNP) and phosphate ion. Control of temperature during the test is very important; the rate of the reaction increases 1.47 times if the temperature changes from  to  . What is the activation energy for the ALP–catalyzed conversion of PNPP to PNP and phosphate?

61. In terms of collision theory, to which of the following is the rate of a chemical reaction proportional?

(a) the change in free energy per second (b) the change in temperature per second (c) the number of collisions per second (d) the number of product molecules

62. Hydrogen iodide, HI, decomposes in the gas phase to produce hydrogen,  , and iodine,  . The value of the rate constant,  for the reaction was measured at several different temperatures and the data are shown here:

What is the value of the activation energy  for this reaction?

63. The element Co exists in two oxidation states, Co(II) and Co(III), and the ions form many complexes. The rate at which one of the complexes of Co(III) was reduced by  in water was measured. Determine the activation energy of the reaction from the following data:

64. The hydrolysis of the sugar sucrose to the sugars glucose and fructose,  follows a first-order rate law for the disappearance of sucrose: rate  (The products of the reaction, glucose and fructose, have the same molecular formulas but differ in the arrangement of the atoms in their molecules.) (a) In neutral solution,  at  and  at  . Determine the activation energy, the frequency factor, and the rate constant for this equation at  (assuming the kinetics remain consistent with the Arrhenius equation at this temperature). (b) When a solution of sucrose with an initial concentration of  reaches equilibrium, the concentration of sucrose is  . How long will it take the solution to reach equilibrium at  in the absence of a catalyst? Because the concentration of sucrose at equilibrium is so low, assume that the reaction is irreversible. (c) Why does assuming that the reaction is irreversible simplify the calculation in part (b)?

65. Use the PhET Reactions & Rates interactive simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction) to simulate a system. On the “Single collision” tab of the simulation applet, enable the “Energy view” by clicking the “  icon. Select the first  reaction (A is yellow, B is purple, and C is navy blue). Using the “straight shot” default option, try launching the  atom with varying amounts of energy. What changes when the Total Energy line at launch is below the transition state of the Potential Energy line? Why? What happens when it is above the transition state? Why?

66. Use the PhET Reactions & Rates interactive simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction) to simulate a system. On the “Single collision” tab of the simulation applet, enable the “Energy view” by clicking the  icon. Select the first  reaction (A is yellow, B is purple, and C is navy blue). Using the “angled shot” option, try launching the  atom with varying angles, but with more Total energy than the transition state. What happens when the  atom hits the  molecule from different directions? Why?

12.6 Reaction Mechanisms

67. Why are elementary reactions involving three or more reactants very uncommon?

68. In general, can we predict the effect of doubling the concentration of  on the rate of the overall reaction  Can we predict the effect if the reaction is known to be an elementary reaction?

69. Define these terms: (a) unimolecular reaction (b) bimolecular reaction (c) elementary reaction (d) overall reaction

70. What is the rate law for the elementary termolecular reaction  For  products?

71. Given the following reactions and the corresponding rate laws, in which of the reactions might the elementary reaction and the overall reaction be the same?

(a)  rate  [CO]   
(b）  rate    
(c)  rate    
(d)  rate    
(e)  rate 

72. Write the rate law for each of the following elementary reactions: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) 

73. Nitrogen monoxide, NO, reacts with hydrogen,  , according to the following equation:  What would the rate law be if the mechanism for this reaction were:  (slow)  fast)

74. Experiments were conducted to study the rate of the reaction represented by this equation.2  Initial concentrations and rates of reaction are given here.

Consider the following questions:

(a) Determine the order for each of the reactants, NO and  , from the data given and show your reasoning. (b) Write the overall rate law for the reaction.   
(c) Calculate the value of the rate constant,  , for the reaction. Include units.   
(d) For experiment 2, calculate the concentration of NO remaining when exactly one-half of the original amount of  had been consumed.   
(e) The following sequence of elementary steps is a proposed mechanism for the reaction.   
Step    
Step    
Step    
Based on the data presented, which of these is the rate determining step? Show that the mechanism is consistent with the observed rate law for the reaction and the overall stoichiometry of the reaction.

75. The reaction of CO with  gives phosgene  , a nerve gas that was used in World War I. Use the mechanism shown here to complete the following exercises:  (fast,  represents the forward rate constant,  the reverse rate constant)  (slow,  the rate constant)  (fast,  the rate constant) (a) Write the overall reaction. (b) Identify all intermediates. (c) Write the rate law for each elementary reaction. (d) Write the overall rate law expression.

12.7 Catalysis

76. Account for the increase in reaction rate brought about by a catalyst.

77. Compare the functions of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts.

78. Consider this scenario and answer the following questions: Chlorine atoms resulting from decomposition of chlorofluoromethanes, such as  , catalyze the decomposition of ozone in the atmosphere. One simplified mechanism for the decomposition is:

   
   
   
(a) Explain why chlorine atoms are catalysts in the gas-phase transformation:   
   
(b) Nitric oxide is also involved in the decomposition of ozone by the mechanism    
   
   
Is NO a catalyst for the decomposition? Explain your answer.

79. For each of the following pairs of reaction diagrams, identify which of the pair is catalyzed: (a)

80. For each of the following pairs of reaction diagrams, identify which of the pairs is catalyzed: (a)

81. For each of the following reaction diagrams, estimate the activation energy  of the reaction:

82. For each of the following reaction diagrams, estimate the activation energy  of the reaction: (a)

83. Assuming the diagrams in Exercise 12.81 represent different mechanisms for the same reaction, which of the reactions has the faster rate?   
84. Consider the similarities and differences in the two reaction diagrams shown in Exercise 12.82. Do these diagrams represent two different overall reactions, or do they represent the same overall reaction taking place by two different mechanisms? Explain your answer.