56.9 Summary
Cryptography can offer certain forms of protection for data even when that data is no longer in a system’s custody. These forms of protection include secrecy, integrity, and authentication. Cryptography achieves such protection by converting the data’s original bit pattern into a different bit pattern, using an algorithm called a cipher. In most cases, the transformation can be reversed to obtain the original bit pattern. Symmetric ciphers use a single secret key shared by all parties with rights to access the data. Asymmetric ciphers use one key to encrypt the data and a second key to decrypt the data, with one of the keys kept secret and the other commonly made public. Cryptographic hashes, on the other hand, do not allow reversal of the cryptography and do not require the use of keys.  
Strong ciphers make it computationally infeasible to obtain the original bit pattern without access to the required key. For symmetric and asymmetric ciphers, this implies that only holders of the proper key can obtain the cipher’s benefits. Since cryptographic hashes have no key, this implies that no one should be able to obtain the original bit pattern from the hash.  
For operating systems, the obvious situations in which cryptography can be helpful are when data is sent to another machine, or when hardware used to store the data might be accessed without the intervention of the operating system. In the latter case, data can be encrypted on the device (using either hardware or software), and decrypted as it is delivered to the operating system.  
Ciphers are generally not secret, but rather are widely known and studied standards. A cipher’s ability to protect data thus relies entirely on key secrecy. If attackers can learn, deduce, or guess the key, all protection is lost. Thus, extreme care in key selection and maintaining key secrecy is required if one relies on cryptography for protection. A good principle is to store keys in as few places as possible, for as short a duration as possible, available to as few parties as possible.  