16.4 Free Energy

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Define Gibbs free energy, and describe its relation to spontaneity   
• Calculate free energy change for a process using free energies of formation for its reactants and products   
• Calculate free energy change for a process using enthalpies of formation and the entropies for its reactants and products   
• Explain how temperature affects the spontaneity of some processes   
• Relate standard free energy changes to equilibrium constants

One of the challenges of using the second law of thermodynamics to determine if a process is spontaneous is that it requires measurements of the entropy change for the system andthe entropy change for the surroundings. An alternative approach involving a new thermodynamic property defined in terms of system properties only was introduced in the late nineteenth century by American mathematician Josiah Willard Gibbs. This new property is called the Gibbs free energy  (or simply the fre energy), and it is defined in terms of a system’s enthalpy and entropy as the following:

Free energy is a state function, and at constant temperature and pressure, the free energy change  may be expressed as the following:

(For simplicity’s sake, the subscript “sys” will be omitted henceforth.)

The relationship between this system property and the spontaneity of a process may be understood by recalling the previously derived second law expression:

The first law requires that  , and at constant pressure  , so this expression may be rewritten as:

Multiplying both sides of this equation by  and rearranging yields the following:

Comparing this equation to the previous one for free energy change shows the following relation:

The free energy change is therefore a reliable indicator of the spontaneity of a process, being directly related to the previously identified spontaneity indicator,  . Table  summarizes the relation between the spontaneity of a process and the arithmetic signs of these indicators.

Relation between Process Spontaneity and Signs of Thermodynamic Properties

What’s “Free” about ΔG?

In addition to indicating spontaneity, the free energy change also provides information regarding the amount of useful work (w) that may be accomplished by a spontaneous process. Although a rigorous treatment of this subject is beyond the scope of an introductory chemistry text, a brief discussion is helpful for gaining a better perspective on this important thermodynamic property.

For this purpose, consider a spontaneous, exothermic process that involves a decrease in entropy. The free energy, as defined by

may be interpreted as representing the difference between the energy produced by the process,  and the energy lost to the surroundings, TΔS. The difference between the energy produced and the energy lost is the energy available (or “free”) to do useful work by the process,  . If the process somehow could be made to take place under conditions of thermodynamic reversibility, the amount of work that could be done would be maximal:

However, as noted previously in this chapter, such conditions are not realistic. In addition, the technologies used to extract work from a spontaneous process (e.g., automobile engine, steam turbine) are never  efficient, and so the work done by these processes is always less than the theoretical maximum. Similar reasoning may be applied to a nonspontaneous process, for which the free energy change represents the minimumamount of work that must be done onthe system to carry out the process.

Calculating Free Energy Change

Free energy is a state function, so its value depends only on the conditions of the initial and final states of the system. A convenient and common approach to the calculation of free energy changes for physical and chemical reactions is by use of widely available compilations of standard state thermodynamic data. One method involves the use of standard enthalpies and entropies to compute standard free energy changes,  , according to the following relation.

EXAMPLE 16.7

Using Standard Enthalpy and Entropy Changes to Calculate 

standard enthalpy and entropy data from Appendix G to calculate the standard free energy change for the

vaporization of water at room temperature (298 K). What does the computed value for  say about the spontaneity of this process?

Solution

The process of interest is the following:

The standard change in free energy may be calculated using the following equation:

From Appendix G:

Using the appendix data to calculate the standard enthalpy and entropy changes yields:

Substitution into the standard free energy equation yields:

At 298 K   so boiling is nonspontaneous (notspontaneous).

Check Your Learning

Use standard enthalpy and entropy data from Appendix G to calculate the standard free energy change for the reaction shown here (298 K). What does the computed value for  say about the spontaneity of this process?

Answer:

 the reaction is nonspontaneous (notspontaneous) at 

The standard free energy change for a reaction may also be calculated from standard free energy of formation  values of the reactants and products involved in the reaction. The standard free energy of formation is the free energy change that accompanies the formation of one mole of a substance from its elements in their standard states. Similar to the standard enthalpy of formation,  is by definition zero for elemental substances in their standard states. The approach used to calculate  for a reaction from  values is the same as that demonstrated previously for enthalpy and entropy changes. For the reaction

the standard free energy change at room temperature may be calculated as

EXAMPLE 16.8

Using Standard Free Energies of Formation to Calculate 

Consider the decomposition of yellow mercury(II) oxide.

Calculate the standard free energy change at room temperature,  using (a) standard free energies of formation and (b) standard enthalpies of formation and standard entropies. Do the results indicate the reaction to be spontaneous or nonspontaneous under standard conditions?

Solution

The required data are available in Appendix G and are shown here.

(a) Using free energies of formation:

(b) Using enthalpies and entropies of formation:

Both ways to calculate the standard free energy change at  give the same numerical value (to three significant figures), and both predict that the process is nonspontaneous (notspontaneous) at room temperature.

Check Your Learning

Calculate  using (a) free energies of formation and (b) enthalpies of formation and entropies (Appendix G). Do the results indicate the reaction to be spontaneous or nonspontaneous at 

Answer:

(a)  , nonspontaneous (b)  , nonspontaneous

Free Energy Changes for Coupled Reactions

The use of free energies of formation to compute free energy changes for reactions as described above is possible because  is a state function, and the approach is analogous to the use of Hess’ Law in computing enthalpy changes (see the chapter on thermochemistry). Consider the vaporization of water as an example:

An equation representing this process may be derived by adding the formation reactions for the two phases of water (necessarily reversing the reaction for the liquid phase). The free energy change for the sum reaction is the sum of free energy changes for the two added reactions:

This approach may also be used in cases where a nonspontaneous reaction is enabled by coupling it to a spontaneous reaction. For example, the production of elemental zinc from zinc sulfide is thermodynamically unfavorable, as indicated by a positive value for  :

The industrial process for production of zinc from sulfidic ores involves coupling this decomposition reaction to the thermodynamically favorable oxidation of sulfur:

The coupled reaction exhibits a negative free energy change and is spontaneous:

This process is typically carried out at elevated temperatures, so this result obtained using standard free energy values is just an estimate. The gist of the calculation, however, holds true.

EXAMPLE 16.9

Calculating Free Energy Change for a Coupled Reaction

Is a reaction coupling the decomposition of ZnS to the formation of H2S expected to be spontaneous under standard conditions?

Solution

Following the approach outlined above and using free energy values from Appendix G:

Decomposition of zinc sull    
Formation of hydrogen sul   
Coupled reaction:

The coupled reaction exhibits a positive free energy change and is thus nonspontaneous.

Check Your Learning

What is the standard free energy change for the reaction below? Is the reaction expected to be spontaneous under standard conditions?

Answer:  ; spontaneous

Temperature Dependence of Spontaneity

As was previously demonstrated in this chapter’s section on entropy, the spontaneity of a process may depend upon the temperature of the system. Phase transitions, for example, will proceed spontaneously in one direction or the other depending upon the temperature of the substance in question. Likewise, some chemical reactions can also exhibit temperature dependent spontaneities. To illustrate this concept, the equation relating free energy change to the enthalpy and entropy changes for the process is considered:

The spontaneity of a process, as reflected in the arithmetic sign of its free energy change, is then determined by the signs of the enthalpy and entropy changes and, in some cases, the absolute temperature. Since  is the absolute (kelvin) temperature, it can only have positive values. Four possibilities therefore exist with regard to the signs of the enthalpy and entropy changes:

1. Both ΔHand ΔSare positive. This condition describes an endothermic process that involves an increase in system entropy. In this case,  will be negative if the magnitude of the TΔSterm is greater than  If the TΔSterm is less than  , the free energy change will be positive. Such a process is spontaneousat hightemperaturesandnonspontaneousatlowtemperatures.   
2. Both ΔHand ΔSare negative. This condition describes an exothermic process that involves a decrease in system entropy. In this case,  will be negative if the magnitude of the TΔSterm is less than ΔH. If the TΔSterm’s magnitude is greater than  the free energy change will be positive. Such a process is spontaneousatlowtemperaturesandnonspontaneousathightemperatures.   
3. ΔHis positive and ΔSis negative. This condition describes an endothermic process that involves a decrease in system entropy. In this case,  will be positive regardless of the temperature. Such a process isnonspontaneousatal temperatures.   
4. ΔHis negative and ΔSis positive. This condition describes an exothermic process that involves an increase in system entropy. In this case,  will be negative regardless of the temperature. Such a process isspontaneousatal temperatures.

These four scenarios are summarized in Figure 16.12.

EXAMPLE 16.10

Predicting the Temperature Dependence of Spontaneity

The incomplete combustion of carbon is described by the following equation

How does the spontaneity of this process depend upon temperature?

Solution

Combustion processes are exothermic  . This particular reaction involves an increase in entropy due to the accompanying increase in the amount of gaseous species (net gain of one mole of gas,  ). The reaction is therefore spontaneous  at all temperatures.

Check Your Learning

Popular chemical hand warmers generate heat by the air-oxidation of iron:

How does the spontaneity of this process depend upon temperature?

Answer:

 and  are negative; the reaction is spontaneous at low temperatures.

When considering the conclusions drawn regarding the temperature dependence of spontaneity, it is important to keep in mind what the terms “high” and “low” mean. Since these terms are adjectives, the temperatures in question are deemed high or low relative to some reference temperature. A process that is nonspontaneous at one temperature but spontaneous at another will necessarily undergo a change in “spontaneity” (as reflected by its  as temperature varies. This is clearly illustrated by a graphical presentation of the free energy change equation, in which  is plotted on the yaxis versus Ton the  axis:

Such a plot is shown in Figure 16.13. A process whose enthalpy and entropy changes are of the same arithmetic sign will exhibit a temperature-dependent spontaneity as depicted by the two yellow lines in the plot. Each line crosses from one spontaneity domain (positive or negative  to the other at a temperature that is characteristic of the process in question. This temperature is represented by the  -intercept of the line, that is, the value of  for which  is zero:

So, saying a process is spontaneous at “high” or “low” temperatures means the temperature is above or below, respectively, that temperature at which  for the process is zero. As noted earlier, the condition of  describes a system at equilibrium.

EXAMPLE 16.11

Equilibrium Temperature for a Phase Transition

As defined in the chapter on liquids and solids, the boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which its liquid and gaseous phases are in equilibrium (that is, when vaporization and condensation occur at equal rates). Use the information in Appendix G to estimate the boiling point of water.

Solution

The process of interest is the following phase change:

When this process is at equilibrium,  , so the following is true:

Using the standard thermodynamic data from Appendix G,

The accepted value for water’s normal boiling point is  , and so this calculation is in reasonable agreement. Note that the values for enthalpy and entropy changes data used were derived from standard data at 298 K (Appendix G). If desired, you could obtain more accurate results by using enthalpy and entropy changes determined at (or at least closer to) the actual boiling point.

Check Your Learning

Use the information in Appendix G to estimate the boiling point of  .

Answer:

313 K (accepted value 319 K)

Free Energy and Equilibrium

The free energy change for a process may be viewed as a measure of its driving force. A negative value for  represents a driving force for the process in the forward direction, while a positive value represents a driving force for the process in the reverse direction. When  is zero, the forward and reverse driving forces are equal, and the process occurs in both directions at the same rate (the system is at equilibrium).

In the chapter on equilibrium the reactionquotient,  , was introduced as a convenient measure of the status of an equilibrium system. Recall that  is the numerical value of the mass action expression for the system, and that you may use its value to identify the direction in which a reaction will proceed in order to achieve equilibrium. When  is lesser than the equilibrium constant,  the reaction will proceed in the forward direction until equilibrium is reached and  . Conversely, if  the process will proceed in the reverse direction until equilibrium is achieved.

The free energy change for a process taking place with reactants and products present under nonstandard conditions(pressures other than 1 bar; concentrations other than  ) is related to the standard free energy change according to this equation:

 is the gas constant  ),  is the kelvin or absolute temperature, and  is the reaction quotient. For gas phase equilibria, the pressure-based reaction quotient,  is used. The concentration-based reaction quotient,  is used for condensed phase equilibria. This equation may be used to predict the spontaneity for a process under any given set of conditions as illustrated in Example 16.12.

EXAMPLE 16.12

Calculating  under Nonstandard Conditions

What is the free energy change for the process shown here under the specified conditions?

 ,  atm,  and  atm  

Solution

The equation relating free energy change to standard free energy change and reaction quotient may be used directly:

Since the computed value for  is positive, the reaction is nonspontaneous under these conditions

Check Your Learning

Calculate the free energy change for this same reaction at  in a  mixture containing 0.100 mol of each gas. Is the reaction spontaneous under these conditions?

Answer:  ; yes

For a system at equilibrium,  and  , and the previous equation may be written as

This form of the equation provides a useful link between these two essential thermodynamic properties, and it can be used to derive equilibrium constants from standard free energy changes and vice versa. The relations between standard free energy changes and equilibrium constants are summarized in Table 16.4.

EXAMPLE 16.13

Calculating an Equilibrium Constant using Standard Free Energy Change

Given that the standard free energies of formation of  , and AgCl(s) are  ,  mol, and  , respectively, calculate the solubility product,  , for  .

Solution

The reaction of interest is the following:

The standard free energy change for this reaction is first computed using standard free energies of formation for its reactants and products:

The equilibrium constant for the reaction may then be derived from its standard free energy change:

This result is in reasonable agreement with the value provided in Appendix J.

Check Your Learning

Use the thermodynamic data provided in Appendix G to calculate the equilibrium constant for the dissociation of dinitrogen tetroxide at  .

Answer:

To further illustrate the relation between these two essential thermodynamic concepts, consider the observation that reactions spontaneously proceed in a direction that ultimately establishes equilibrium. As may be shown by plotting the free energy versus the extent of the reaction (for example, as reflected in the value of  , equilibrium is established when the system’s free energy is minimized (Figure 16.14). If a system consists of reactants and products in nonequilibrium amounts  , the reaction will proceed spontaneously in the direction necessary to establish equilibrium.

Key Terms

entropy (S) state function that is a measure of the matter and/or energy dispersal within a system, determined by the number of system microstates; often described as a measure of the disorder of the system   
Gibbs free energy change  thermodynamic property defined in terms of system enthalpy and entropy; all spontaneous processes involve a decrease in    
microstate possible configuration or arrangement of matter and energy within a system   
nonspontaneous process process that requires continual input of energy from an external source   
reversible process process that takes place so slowly as to be capable of reversing direction in response to an infinitesimally small change in conditions; hypothetical construct that can only be approximated by real processes   
second law of thermodynamics all spontaneous processes involve an increase in the entropy of the universe   
spontaneous change process that takes place without a continuous input of energy from an external source   
standard entropy  entropy for one mole of a substance at 1 bar pressure; tabulated values are usually determined at    
standard entropy change  change in entropy for a reaction calculated using the standard entropies   
standard free energy change  change in free energy for a process occurring under standard conditions (1 bar pressure for gases, 1 M concentration for solutions)   
standard free energy of formation  change in free energy accompanying the formation of one mole of substance from its elements in their standard states   
third law of thermodynamics entropy of a perfect crystal at absolute zero (0 K) is zero

Key Equations

Summary

16.1 Spontaneity

Chemical and physical processes have a natural tendency to occur in one direction under certain conditions. A spontaneous process occurs without the need for a continual input of energy from some external source, while a nonspontaneous process requires such. Systems undergoing a spontaneous process may or may not experience a gain or loss of energy, but they will experience a change in the way matter and/or energy is distributed within the system.

16.2 Entropy

Entropy (S) is a state function that can be related to the number of microstates for a system (the number of ways the system can be arranged) and to the ratio of reversible heat to kelvin temperature. It may be interpreted as a measure of the dispersal or distribution of matter and/or energy in a system, and it is often described as representing the “disorder” of the system.

For a given substance, entropy depends on phase with  . For different substances in the same physical state at a given temperature, entropy is typically greater for heavier atoms or more complex molecules. Entropy increases when a system is heated and when solutions form. Using these guidelines, the sign of entropy changes for

some chemical reactions and physical changes may be reliably predicted.

16.3 The Second and Third Laws of Thermodynamics

The second law of thermodynamics states that a spontaneous process increases the entropy of the universe,  . If  , the process is nonspontaneous, and if  , the system is at equilibrium. The third law of thermodynamics establishes the zero for entropy as that of a perfect, pure crystalline solid at  . With only one possible microstate, the entropy is zero. We may compute the standard entropy change for a process by using standard entropy values for the reactants and products involved in the process.

16.4 Free Energy

Gibbs free energy (  is a state function defined with regard to system quantities only and may be used to predict the spontaneity of a process. A negative value for  indicates a spontaneous process; a positive  indicates a nonspontaneous process; and a  of zero indicates that the system is at equilibrium. A number of approaches to the computation of free energy changes are possible.

Exercises

16.1 Spontaneity

1. What is a spontaneous reaction?   
2. What is a nonspontaneous reaction?   
3. Indicate whether the following processes are spontaneous or nonspontaneous. (a) Liquid water freezing at a temperature below its freezing point (b) Liquid water freezing at a temperature above its freezing point (c) The combustion of gasoline (d) A ball thrown into the air (e) A raindrop falling to the ground (f) Iron rusting in a moist atmosphere

4. A helium-filled balloon spontaneously deflates overnight as He atoms diffuse through the wall of the balloon. Describe the redistribution of matter and/or energy that accompanies this process.

5. Many plastic materials are organic polymers that contain carbon and hydrogen. The oxidation of these plastics in air to form carbon dioxide and water is a spontaneous process; however, plastic materials tend to persist in the environment. Explain.

16.2 Entropy

6. In Figure 16.8 all possible distributions and microstates are shown for four different particles shared between two boxes. Determine the entropy change, ΔS, if the particles are initially evenly distributed between the two boxes, but upon redistribution all end up in Box (b).   
7. In Figure 16.8 all of the possible distributions and microstates are shown for four different particles shared between two boxes. Determine the entropy change,  , for the system when it is converted from distribution (b) to distribution (d).   
8. How does the process described in the previous item relate to the system shown in Figure 16.4?   
9. Consider a system similar to the one in Figure 16.8, except that it contains six particles instead of four. What is the probability of having all the particles in only one of the two boxes in the case? Compare this with the similar probability for the system of four particles that we have derived to be equal to  What does this comparison tell us about even larger systems?   
10. Consider the system shown in Figure 16.9. What is the change in entropy for the process where the energy is initially associated only with particle A, but in the final state the energy is distributed between two different particles?   
11. Consider the system shown in Figure 16.9. What is the change in entropy for the process where the energy is initially associated with particles A and B, and the energy is distributed between two particles in different boxes (one in A-B, the other in C-D)?

12. Arrange the following sets of systems in order of increasing entropy. Assume one mole of each substance and the same temperature for each member of a set. (a)  (b)  (c) 

13. At room temperature, the entropy of the halogens increases from  to  to  . Explain.

14. Consider two processes: sublimation of  and melting of  (Note: the latter process can occur at the same temperature but somewhat higher pressure).  Is  positive or negative in these processes? In which of the processes will the magnitude of the entropy change be greater?

15. Indicate which substance in the given pairs has the higher entropy value. Explain your choices. (a)  or  (b)  or  (c)  or 

16. Predict the sign of the entropy change for the following processes. (a) An ice cube is warmed to near its melting point. (b) Exhaled breath forms fog on a cold morning. (c) Snow melts.

17. Predict the sign of the entropy change for the following processes. Give a reason for your prediction. (a)  (b)  (c) 

18. Write the balanced chemical equation for the combustion of methane,  , to give carbon dioxide and water vapor. Explain why it is difficult to predict whether  is positive or negative for this chemical reaction.

19. Write the balanced chemical equation for the combustion of benzene,  , to give carbon dioxide and water vapor. Would you expect  to be positive or negative in this process?

16.3 The Second and Third Laws of Thermodynamics

20. What is the difference between  and  for a chemical change?

21. Calculate  for the following changes. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  

22. Determine the entropy change for the combustion of liquid ethanol,  , under the standard conditions to give gaseous carbon dioxide and liquid water.

23. Determine the entropy change for the combustion of gaseous propane,  , under the standard conditions to give gaseous carbon dioxide and water.

24. “Thermite” reactions have been used for welding metal parts such as railway rails and in metal refining. One such thermite reaction is  Is the reaction spontaneous at room temperature under standard conditions? During the reaction, the surroundings absorb  of heat.

25. Using the relevant  values listed in Appendix G, calculate  for the following changes: (a)  (b) 

26. From the following information, determine  for the following: 

27. By calculating  at each temperature, determine if the melting of 1 mole of NaCl(s) is spontaneous at  and at  .  What assumptions are made about the thermodynamic information (entropy and enthalpy values) used to solve this problem?

28. Use the standard entropy data in Appendix G to determine the change in entropy for each of the following reactions. All the processes occur at the standard conditions and  . (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  ，graphite) + 2H2O(g) (f ) 

29. Use the standard entropy data in Appendix G to determine the change in entropy for each of the following reactions. All the processes occur at the standard conditions and  . (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) 

16.4 Free Energy

30. What is the difference between  and  for a chemical change?   
31. A reaction has  and  Is the reaction spontaneous at room temperature? If not, under what temperature conditions will it become spontaneous?   
32. Explain what happens as a reaction starts with  (negative) and reaches the point where  .   
33. Use the standard free energy of formation data in Appendix G to determine the free energy change for each of the following reactions, which are run under standard state conditions and  Identify each as either spontaneous or nonspontaneous at these conditions. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  ， graphite) + 2H2O(g) (f ) 

34. Use the standard free energy data in Appendix G to determine the free energy change for each of the following reactions, which are run under standard state conditions and  . Identify each as either spontaneous or nonspontaneous at these conditions. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) 

35. Given:

(a) Determine the standard free energy of formation,  for phosphoric acid.   
(b) How does your calculated result compare to the value in Appendix G? Explain.

36. Is the formation of ozone  from oxygen  spontaneous at room temperature under standard state conditions?

37. Consider the decomposition of red mercury(II) oxide under standard state conditi  (a) Is the decomposition spontaneous under standard state conditions? (b) Above what temperature does the reaction become spontaneous?

38. Among other things, an ideal fuel for the control thrusters of a space vehicle should decompose in a spontaneous exothermic reaction when exposed to the appropriate catalyst. Evaluate the following substances under standard state conditions as suitable candidates for fuels. (a) Ammonia:  (b) Diborane:  (c) Hydrazine:  (d) Hydrogen peroxide: 

39. Calculate  for each of the following reactions from the equilibrium constant at the temperature given.

40. Calculate  for each of the following reactions from the equilibrium constant at the temperature given.

(a    
(b   
(c)   
(d   
(e)   
 p = 4.4 × 10

41. Calculate the equilibrium constant at  for each of the following reactions from the value of  given.

42. Calculate the equilibrium constant at  for each of the following reactions from the value of  given. (a)  (b) (c) (d) (e)

43. Calculate the equilibrium constant at the temperature given.

44. Calculate the equilibrium constant at the temperature given.

45. Consider the following reaction at 298 K:

 

What is the standard free energy change at this temperature? Describe what happens to the initial system, where the reactants and products are in standard states, as it approaches equilibrium.

46. Determine the normal boiling point (in kelvin) of dichloromethane,  . Find the actual boiling point using the Internet or some other source, and calculate the percent error in the temperature. Explain the differences, if any, between the two values.

47. Under what conditions is  spontaneous?

48. At room temperature, the equilibrium constant  for the self-ionization of water is  . Using this information, calculate the standard free energy change for the aqueous reaction of hydrogen ion with hydroxide ion to produce water. (Hint: The reaction is the reverse of the self-ionization reaction.)

49. Hydrogen sulfide is a pollutant found in natural gas. Following its removal, it is converted to sulfur by the reaction  ， rhombic)  What is the equilibrium constant for this reaction? Is the reaction endothermic or exothermic?

50. Consider the decomposition of  into  and  . What is the equilibrium partial pressure of  at room temperature?

51. In the laboratory, hydrogen chloride  and ammonia  often escape from bottles of their solutions and react to form the ammonium chloride  , the white glaze often seen on glassware. Assuming that the number of moles of each gas that escapes into the room is the same, what is the maximum partial pressure of HCl and  in the laboratory at room temperature? (Hint: The partial pressures will be equal and are at their maximum value when at equilibrium.)

52. Benzene can be prepared from acetylene.  Determine the equilibrium constant at  and at  Is the reaction spontaneous at either of these temperatures? Why is all acetylene not found as benzene?

53. Carbon dioxide decomposes into CO and  at elevated temperatures. What is the equilibrium partial pressure of oxygen in a sample at  for which the initial pressure of  was 1.15 atm?

54. Carbon tetrachloride, an important industrial solvent, is prepared by the chlorination of methane at 850 K.  What is the equilibrium constant for the reaction at 850 K? Would the reaction vessel need to be heated or cooled to keep the temperature of the reaction constant?

55. Acetic acid,  , can form a dimer,  , in the gas phase.  The dimer is held together by two hydrogen bonds with a total strength of  per mole of dimer.

At  , the equilibrium constant for the dimerization is  (pressure in atm). What is  for the reaction?

56. Determine  for the following reactions.

(a) Antimony pentachloride decomposes at  . The reaction is:   
   
An equilibrium mixture in a  flask at  contains  of  ,  of  , and  of Cl2.   
(b) Chlorine molecules dissociate according to this reaction:   
   
 of  molecules dissociate at  and a pressure of 1.00 atm.

57. Given that the  for  and  is  /mole and  /mole respectively, determine the solubility product,  , for  .

58. Determine the standard free energy change,  for the formation of  given that the  for  and  are  /mole and  /mole respectively, and the solubility product for  is  .

59. Determine the standard enthalpy change, entropy change, and free energy change for the conversion of diamond to graphite. Discuss the spontaneity of the conversion with respect to the enthalpy and entropy changes. Explain why diamond spontaneously changing into graphite is not observed.

60. The evaporation of one mole of water at  has a standard free energy change of  .   (a) Is the evaporation of water under standard thermodynamic conditions spontaneous? (b) Determine the equilibrium constant,  for this physical process. (c) By calculating  , determine if the evaporation of water at  is spontaneous when the partial pressure of water,  is 0.011 atm. (d) If the evaporation of water were always nonspontaneous at room temperature, wet laundry would never dry when placed outside. In order for laundry to dry, what must be the value of  in the air?

61. In glycolysis, the reaction of glucose (Glu) to form glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) requires ATP to be present as described by the following equation:   In this process, ATP becomes ADP summarized by the following equation: ATP-  ADP  Determine the standard free energy change for the following reaction, and explain why ATP is necessary to drive this process: Glu  

62. One of the important reactions in the biochemical pathway glycolysis is the reaction of glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) to form fructose-6-phosphate (F6P):   (a) Is the reaction spontaneous or nonspontaneous under standard thermodynamic conditions? (b) Standard thermodynamic conditions imply the concentrations of G6P and F6P to be  , however, in a typical cell, they are not even close to these values. Calculate  when the concentrations of G6P and F6P are  and  respectively, and discuss the spontaneity of the forward reaction under these conditions. Assume the temperature is  .

63. Without doing a numerical calculation, determine which of the following will reduce the free energy change for the reaction, that is, make it less positive or more negative, when the temperature is increased. Explain. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

64. When ammonium chloride is added to water and stirred, it dissolves spontaneously and the resulting solution feels cold. Without doing any calculations, deduce the signs of  and  for this process, and justify your choices.

65. An important source of copper is from the copper ore, chalcocite, a form of copper(I) sulfide. When heated, the  decomposes to form copper and sulfur described by the following equation:  (a) Determine  for the decomposition of  . (b) The reaction of sulfur with oxygen yields sulfur dioxide as the only product. Write an equation that describes this reaction, and determine  for the process. (c) The production of copper from chalcocite is performed by roasting the  in air to produce the Cu. By combining the equations from Parts (a) and (b), write the equation that describes the roasting of the chalcocite, and explain why coupling these reactions together makes for a more efficient process for the production of the copper.

66. What happens to  (becomes more negative or more positive) for the following chemical reactions when the partial pressure of oxygen is increased? (a)  (b)  (c)