CHAPTER 14

Multiple Integrals

This chapter shows how to integrate functions of two or more variables. First, a double integral is defined as the limit of sums. Second, we find a fast way to compute it. The key idea is to replace a double integral by two ordinary “single” integrals.

The double integral  starts with  : For each fixed  we integrate with respect to  : The answer depends on  : Now integrate again, this time with respect to  : The limits of integration need care and attention! Frequently those limits on  and  are the hardest part.

Why bother with sums and limits in the first place ? Two reasons. There has to be a definition and a computation to fall back on, when the single integrals are difficult or impossible. And also—this we emphasize—multiple integrals represent more than area and volume. Those words and the pictures that go with them are the easiest to understand. You can almost see the volume as a “sum of slices” or a “double sum of thin sticks.” The true applications are mostly to other things, but the central idea is always the same: Add up small pieces and take limits.

We begin with the area of  and the volume of  ; by double integrals.

A LIMIT OF SUMS

The graph of  is a curved surface above the  plane. At the poi¤nt  in¤the p¤lane, the height of the surface is  : (The surface is above the  plane only when  is positive. Volumes below the plane come with minus signs, like areas below the  axis.) We begin by choosing a positive function—for example  :

The base of our solid is a region  in the  plane. That region will be chopped into small rectangles (sides  and  ). When  itself is the rectangle  ;  ; the small pieces fit perfectly. For a triangle or a circle, the rectangles miss part of  : But they do fit in the limit, and any region with a piecewise smooth boundary will be acceptable.

Question What is the volume above  and below the graph of  ? Answer It is a double integral—the integral of  over  : To reach it we begin with a sum, as suggested by Figure 14.1.