18.3 Reconnection and Speciation Rates

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Describe pathways of species evolution in hybrid zones • Explain the two major theories on rates of speciation

Speciation occurs over a span of evolutionary time, so when a new species arises, there is a transition period during which the closely related species continue to interact.

Reconnection

After speciation, two species may recombine or even continue interacting indefinitely. Individual organisms will mate with any nearby individual with whom they are capable of breeding. We call an area where two closely related species continue to interact and reproduce, forming hybrids a hybrid zone. Over time, the hybrid zone may change depending on the fitness of the hybrids and the reproductive barriers (Figure 18.22). If the hybrids are less fit than the parents, speciation reinforcement occurs, and the species continue to diverge until they can no longer mate and produce viable offspring. If reproductive barriers weaken, fusion occurs and the two species become one. Barriers remain the same if hybrids are fit and reproductive: stability may occur and hybridization continues.

If two species eat a different diet but one of the food sources is eliminated and both species are forced to eat the same foods, what change in the hybrid zone is most likely to occur?

Hybrids can be either less fit than the parents, more fit, or about the same. Usually hybrids tend to be less fit; therefore, such reproduction diminishes over time, nudging the two species to diverge further in a process we call reinforcement. Scientists use this term because the hybrids' low success reinforces the original speciation. If the hybrids are as fit or more fit than the parents, the two species may fuse back into one species (Figure 18.23). Scientists have also observed that sometimes two species will remain separate but also continue to interact to produce some individuals. Scientists classify this as stability because no real net change is taking place.

Varying Rates of Speciation

Scientists around the world study speciation, documenting observations both of living organisms and those found in the fossil record. As their ideas take shape and as research reveals new details about how life evolves, they develop models to help explain speciation rates. In terms of how quickly speciation occurs, we can observe two current patterns: gradual speciation model and punctuated equilibrium model.

In the gradual speciation model, species diverge gradually over time in small steps. In the punctuated equilibrium model, a new species undergoes changes quickly from the parent species, and then remains largely unchanged for long periods of time afterward (Figure 18.23). We call this early change model punctuated equilibrium, because it begins with a punctuated or periodic change and then remains in balance afterward. While punctuated equilibrium suggests a faster tempo, it does not necessarily exclude gradualism.

Which of the following statements is false?

a. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to occur in a small population that experiences a rapid change in its environment.   
b. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to occur in a large population that lives in a stable climate.   
c. Gradual speciation is most likely to occur in species that live in a stable climate.   
d. Gradual speciation and punctuated equilibrium both result in the divergence of species.

The primary influencing factor on changes in speciation rate is environmental conditions. Under some conditions, selection occurs quickly or radically. Consider a species of snails that had been living with the same basic form for many thousands of years. Layers of their fossils would appear similar for a long time. When a change in the environment takes place—such as a drop in the water level—a small number of organisms are separated from the rest in a brief period of time, essentially forming one large and one tiny population. The tiny population faces new environmental conditions. Because its gene pool quickly became so small, any variation that surfaces and that aids in surviving the new conditions becomes the predominant form.

LINK TO LEARNING

Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/snails) to continue the speciation story of the snails.

KEY TERMS

adaptation heritable trait or behavior in an organism that aids in its survival and reproduction in its present environment   
adaptive radiation speciation when one species radiates to form several other species   
allopatric speciation speciation that occurs via geographic separation   
allopolyploid polyploidy formed between two related, but separate species   
aneuploidy condition of a cell having an extra chromosome or missing a chromosome for its species   
autopolyploid polyploidy formed within a single species   
behavioral isolation type of reproductive isolation that occurs when a specific behavior or lack of one prevents reproduction from taking place   
convergent evolution process by which groups of organisms independently evolve to similar forms   
dispersal allopatric speciation that occurs when a few members of a species move to a new geographical area   
divergent evolution process by which groups of organisms evolve in diverse directions from a common point   
gametic barrier prezygotic barrier occurring when closely related individuals of different species mate, but differences in their gamete cells (eggs and sperm) prevent fertilization from taking place   
gradual speciation model model that shows how species diverge gradually over time in small steps   
habitat isolation reproductive isolation resulting when species' populations move or are moved to a new habitat, taking up residence in a place that no longer overlaps with the same species' other populations   
homologous structures parallel structures in diverse organisms that have a common ancestor   
hybrid offspring of two closely related individuals, not of the same species   
hybrid zone area where two closely related species continue to interact and reproduce, forming hybrids   
natural selection reproduction of individuals with favorable genetic traits that survive environmental change because of those traits, leading to evolutionary change   
postzygotic barrier reproductive isolation mechanism that occurs after zygote formation   
prezygotic barrier reproductive isolation mechanism that occurs before zygote formation   
punctuated equilibrium model for rapid speciation that can occur when an event causes a small portion of a population to be cut off from the rest of the population   
reinforcement continued speciation divergence between two related species due to low fitness of hybrids between them   
reproductive isolation situation that occurs when a species is reproductively independent from other species; behavior, location, or reproductive barriers may cause this to happen   
speciation formation of a new species   
species group of populations that interbreed and produce fertile offspring   
sympatric speciation speciation that occurs in the same geographic space   
temporal isolation differences in breeding schedules that can act as a form of prezygotic barrier leading to reproductive isolation   
variation genetic differences among individuals in a population   
vestigial structure physical structure present in an organism but that has no apparent function and appears to be from a functional structure in a distant ancestor   
vicariance allopatric speciation that occurs when something in the environment separates organisms of the same species into separate groups

CHAPTER SUMMARY 18.1 Understanding Evolution

Evolution is the process of adaptation through mutation which allows more desirable characteristics to pass to the next generation. Over time, organisms evolve more characteristics that are beneficial to their survival. For living organisms to adapt and change to environmental pressures, genetic variation must be present. With genetic variation, individuals have differences in form and function that allow some to survive certain conditions better than others. These organisms pass their favorable traits to their offspring. Eventually, environments change, and what was once a desirable, advantageous trait may become an undesirable trait and organisms may further evolve. Evolution may be

convergent with similar traits evolving in multiple species or divergent with diverse traits evolving in multiple species that came from a common ancestor. We can observe evidence of evolution by means of DNA code and the fossil record, and also by the existence of homologous and vestigial structures.

18.2 Formation of New Species

Speciation occurs along two main pathways: geographic separation (allopatric speciation) and through mechanisms that occur within a shared habitat (sympatric speciation). Both pathways isolate a population reproductively in some form. Mechanisms of reproductive isolation act as barriers between closely related species, enabling them to diverge and exist as genetically independent species. Prezygotic barriers block reproduction prior to formation of a zygote; whereas, postzygotic barriers block reproduction after fertilization occurs. For a new species to develop, something must introduce a reproductive barrier. Sympatric speciation can occur through errors in meiosis that form gametes with extra chromosomes (polyploidy). Autopolyploidy occurs within a single species; whereas, allopolyploidy occurs between closely related species.

18.3 Reconnection and Speciation Rates

Speciation is not a precise division: overlap between closely related species can occur in areas called hybrid zones. Organisms reproduce with other similar organisms. The fitness of these hybrid offspring can affect the two species' evolutionary path. Scientists propose two models for the rate of speciation: one model illustrates how a species can change slowly over time. The other model demonstrates how change can occur quickly from a parent generation to a new species. Both models continue to follow natural selection patterns.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 18.14 Which is most likely to survive, offspring with  chromosomes or offspring with 2n-1 chromosomes?   
2. Figure 18.22 If two species eat a different diet but one of the food sources is eliminated and both species are forced to eat the same foods, what change in the hybrid zone is most likely to occur?

3. Figure 18.23 Which of the following statements is false?

a. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to occur in a small population that experiences a rapid change in its environment.   
b. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to occur in a large population that lives in a stable climate.   
c. Gradual speciation is most likely to occur in species that live in a stable climate.   
d. Gradual speciation and punctuated equilibrium both result in the evolution of new species.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. Which scientific concept did Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace independently discover?

a. mutation b. natural selection c. overbreeding d. sexual reproduction

5. Which of the following situations will lead to natural selection?

a. The seeds of two plants land near each other and one grows larger than the other.   
b. Two types of fish eat the same kind of food, and one is better able to gather food than the other.   
c. Male lions compete for the right to mate with females, with only one possible winner.   
d. all of the above

6. Which description is an example of a phenotype?

a. A certain duck has a blue beak. b. A mutation occurred to a flower. c. Most cheetahs live solitary lives. d. both a and c

7. Which situation is most likely an example of convergent evolution?

a. Squid and humans have eyes similar in structure.   
b. Worms and snakes both move without legs.   
c. Some bats and birds have wings that allow them to fly.   
d. all of the above

8. Which situation would most likely lead to allopatric speciation?

a. Flood causes the formation of a new lake.   
b. A storm causes several large trees to fall down.   
c. A mutation causes a new trait to develop.   
d. An injury causes an organism to seek out a new food source.

9. What is the main difference between dispersal and vicariance?

a. One leads to allopatric speciation, whereas the other leads to sympatric speciation.   
b. One involves the movement of the organism, and the other involves a change in the environment.   
c. One depends on a genetic mutation occurring, and the other does not.   
d. One involves closely related organisms, and the other involves only individuals of the same species.

10. Which variable increases the likelihood of allopatric speciation taking place more quickly?

a. lower rate of mutation   
b. longer distance between divided groups   
c. increased instances of hybrid formation   
d. equivalent numbers of individuals in each population

11. What is the main difference between autopolyploid and allopolyploid?

a. the number of chromosomes b. the functionality of the chromosomes c. the source of the extra chromosomes d. the number of mutations in the extra chromosomes

12. Which reproductive combination produces hybrids?

a. when individuals of the same species in different geographical areas reproduce   
b. when any two individuals sharing the same habitat reproduce   
c. when members of closely related species reproduce   
d. when offspring of the same parents reproduce

13. Which condition is the basis for a species to be reproductively isolated from other members?

a. It does not share its habitat with related species.   
b. It does not exist out of a single habitat.   
c. It does not exchange genetic information with other species.   
d. It does not undergo evolutionary changes for a significant period of time.

14. Which situation is notan example of a prezygotic barrier?

a. Two species of turtles breed at different times of the year.   
b. Two species of flowers attract different pollinators.   
c. Two species of birds display different mating dances.   
d. Two species of insects produce infertile offspring.

15. Which term is used to describe the continued divergence of species based on the low fitness of hybrid offspring?

a. reinforcement   
b. fusion   
c. stability   
d. punctuated equilibrium

16. Which components of speciation would be least likely to be a part of punctuated equilibrium?

a. a division of populations b. a change in environmental conditions c. ongoing gene flow among all individuals d. a large number of mutations taking place at once

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

17. If a person scatters a handful of garden pea plant seeds in one area, how would natural selection work in this situation?   
18. Why do scientists consider vestigial structures evidence for evolution?   
19. How does the scientific meaning of “theory” differ from the common vernacular meaning?   
20. Explain why the statement that a monkey is more evolved than a mouse is incorrect.   
21. Why do island chains provide ideal conditions for adaptive radiation to occur?   
22. Two species of fish had recently undergone sympatric speciation. The males of each species had a different coloring through which the females could identify and choose a partner from her own species. After some time, pollution made the lake so cloudy that it was hard for females to distinguish colors. What might take place in this situation?   
23. Why can polyploidy individuals lead to speciation fairly quickly?   
24. What do both rate of speciation models have in common?   
25. Describe a situation where hybrid reproduction would cause two species to fuse into one.