7.6 Molecular Structure and Polarity

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Predict the structures of small molecules using valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory   
• Explain the concepts of polar covalent bonds and molecular polarity   
• Assess the polarity of a molecule based on its bonding and structure

Thus far, we have used two-dimensional Lewis structures to represent molecules. However, molecular structure is actually three-dimensional, and it is important to be able to describe molecular bonds in terms of their distances, angles, and relative arrangements in space (Figure 7.14). A bond angle is the angle between any two bonds that include a common atom, usually measured in degrees. A bond distance (or bond length) is the distance between the nuclei of two bonded atoms along the straight line joining the nuclei. Bond distances are measured in Ångstroms  or picometers  ,  .

VSEPR Theory

Valence shell electron-pair repulsion theory (VSEPR theory) enables us to predict the molecular structure, including approximate bond angles around a central atom, of a molecule from an examination of the number of bonds and lone electron pairs in its Lewis structure. The VSEPR model assumes that electron pairs in the valence shell of a central atom will adopt an arrangement that minimizes repulsions between these electron pairs by maximizing the distance between them. The electrons in the valence shell of a central atom form either bonding pairs of electrons, located primarily between bonded atoms, or lone pairs. The electrostatic repulsion of these electrons is reduced when the various regions of high electron density assume positions as far from each other as possible.

VSEPR theory predicts the arrangement of electron pairs around each central atom and, usually, the correct arrangement of atoms in a molecule. We should understand, however, that the theory only considers electronpair repulsions. Other interactions, such as nuclear-nuclear repulsions and nuclear-electron attractions, are also involved in the final arrangement that atoms adopt in a particular molecular structure.

As a simple example of VSEPR theory, let us predict the structure of a gaseous  molecule. The Lewis structure of  (Figure 7.15) shows only two electron pairs around the central beryllium atom. With two bonds and no lone pairs of electrons on the central atom, the bonds are as far apart as possible, and the electrostatic repulsion between these regions of high electron density is reduced to a minimum when they are on opposite sides of the central atom. The bond angle is  (Figure 7.15).

Figure 7.16 illustrates this and other electron-pair geometries that minimize the repulsions among regions of high electron density (bonds and/or lone pairs). Two regions of electron density around a central atom in a molecule form a linear geometry; three regions form a trigonal planar geometry; four regions form a tetrahedral geometry; five regions form a trigonal bipyramidal geometry; and six regions form an octahedral geometry.

Electron-pair Geometry versus Molecular Structure

It is important to note that electron-pair geometry around a central atom is notthe same thing as its molecular structure. The electron-pair geometries shown in Figure 7.16 describe all regions where electrons are located, bonds as well as lone pairs. Molecular structure describes the location of the atoms, not the electrons.

We differentiate between these two situations by naming the geometry that includes al electron pairs the electron-pair geometry. The structure that includes only the placement of the atoms in the molecule is called the molecular structure. The electron-pair geometries will be the same as the molecular structures when there are no lone electron pairs around the central atom, but they will be different when there are lone pairs present on the central atom.

For example, the methane molecule,  , which is the major component of natural gas, has four bonding pairs of electrons around the central carbon atom; the electron-pair geometry is tetrahedral, as is the molecular structure (Figure 7.17). On the other hand, the ammonia molecule,  , also has four electron pairs associated with the nitrogen atom, and thus has a tetrahedral electron-pair geometry. One of these regions, however, is a lone pair, which is not included in the molecular structure, and this lone pair influences the shape of the molecule (Figure 7.18).

As seen in Figure 7.18, small distortions from the ideal angles in Figure 7.16 can result from differences in repulsion between various regions of electron density. VSEPR theory predicts these distortions by establishing an order of repulsions and an order of the amount of space occupied by different kinds of electron pairs. The order of electron-pair repulsions from greatest to least repulsion is:

lone pair-lone pair  lone pair-bonding pair  bonding pair-bonding pair

This order of repulsions determines the amount of space occupied by different regions of electrons. A lone pair of electrons occupies a larger region of space than the electrons in a triple bond; in turn, electrons in a triple bond occupy more space than those in a double bond, and so on. The order of sizes from largest to smallest is:

lone pair  triple bond  double bond  single bond

Consider formaldehyde,  , which is used as a preservative for biological and anatomical specimens (Figure 7.14). This molecule has regions of high electron density that consist of two single bonds and one double bond. The basic geometry is trigonal planar with  bond angles, but we see that the double bond causes slightly larger angles  , and the angle between the single bonds is slightly smaller  .

In the ammonia molecule, the three hydrogen atoms attached to the central nitrogen are not arranged in a flat, trigonal planar molecular structure, but rather in a three-dimensional trigonal pyramid (Figure 7.18) with the nitrogen atom at the apex and the three hydrogen atoms forming the base. The ideal bond angles in a trigonal pyramid are based on the tetrahedral electron pair geometry. Again, there are slight deviations from the ideal because lone pairs occupy larger regions of space than do bonding electrons. The H–N–H bond angles in  are slightly smaller than the  angle in a regular tetrahedron (Figure 7.16) because the lone pair-bonding pair repulsion is greater than the bonding pair-bonding pair repulsion (Figure 7.18). Figure 7.19 illustrates the ideal molecular structures, which are predicted based on the electron-pair geometries for various combinations of lone pairs and bonding pairs.

According to VSEPR theory, the terminal atom locations (Xs in Figure 7.19) are equivalent within the linear, trigonal planar, and tetrahedral electron-pair geometries (the first three rows of the table). It does not matter which X is replaced with a lone pair because the molecules can be rotated to convert positions. For trigonal bipyramidal electron-pair geometries, however, there are two distinct X positions, as shown in Figure 7.20: an axial position (if we hold a model of a trigonal bipyramid by the two axial positions, we have an axis around which we can rotate the model) and an equatorial position (three positions form an equator around the middle of the molecule). As shown in Figure 7.19, the axial position is surrounded by bond angles of  , whereas the equatorial position has more space available because of the  bond angles. In a trigonal bipyramidal electron-pair geometry, lone pairs always occupy equatorial positions because these more spacious positions can more easily accommodate the larger lone pairs.

Theoretically, we can come up with three possible arrangements for the three bonds and two lone pairs for the  molecule (Figure 7.20). The stable structure is the one that puts the lone pairs in equatorial locations, giving a T-shaped molecular structure.

When a central atom has two lone electron pairs and four bonding regions, we have an octahedral electronpair geometry. The two lone pairs are on opposite sides of the octahedron (  apart), giving a square planar molecular structure that minimizes lone pair-lone pair repulsions (Figure 7.19).

Predicting Electron Pair Geometry and Molecular Structure

The following procedure uses VSEPR theory to determine the electron pair geometries and the molecular structures:

1. Write the Lewis structure of the molecule or polyatomic ion.   
2. Count the number of regions of electron density (lone pairs and bonds) around the central atom. A single, double, or triple bond counts as one region of electron density.   
3. Identify the electron-pair geometry based on the number of regions of electron density: linear, trigonal planar, tetrahedral, trigonal bipyramidal, or octahedral (Figure 7.19, first column).   
4. Use the number of lone pairs to determine the molecular structure (Figure 7.19). If more than one arrangement of lone pairs and chemical bonds is possible, choose the one that will minimize repulsions, remembering that lone pairs occupy more space than multiple bonds, which occupy more space than single bonds. In trigonal bipyramidal arrangements, repulsion is minimized when every lone pair is in an equatorial position. In an octahedral arrangement with two lone pairs, repulsion is minimized when the lone pairs are on opposite sides of the central atom.

The following examples illustrate the use of VSEPR theory to predict the molecular structure of molecules or ions that have no lone pairs of electrons. In this case, the molecular structure is identical to the electron pair geometry.

EXAMPLE 7.11

Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure:  and 

Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure for each of the following:

(a) carbon dioxide,  , a molecule produced by the combustion of fossil fuels (b) boron trichloride,  , an important industrial chemical

Solution

(a) We write the Lewis structure of  as:

This shows us two regions of high electron density around the carbon atom—each double bond counts as one region, and there are no lone pairs on the carbon atom. Using VSEPR theory, we predict that the two regions of electron density arrange themselves on opposite sides of the central atom with a bond angle of  . The

electron-pair geometry and molecular structure are identical, and  molecules are linear.

(b) We write the Lewis structure of  as:

Thus we see that  contains three bonds, and there are no lone pairs of electrons on boron. The arrangement of three regions of high electron density gives a trigonal planar electron-pair geometry. The B–Cl bonds lie in a plane with  angles between them.  also has a trigonal planar molecular structure (Figure 7.21).

The electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of  are both trigonal planar. Note that the VSEPR geometry indicates the correct bond angles  , unlike the Lewis structure shown above.

Check Your Learning

Carbonate,  is a common polyatomic ion found in various materials from eggshells to antacids. What are the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of this polyatomic ion?

Answer:

The electron-pair geometry is trigonal planar and the molecular structure is trigonal planar. Due to resonance, all three  bonds are identical. Whether they are single, double, or an average of the two, each bond counts as one region of electron density.

EXAMPLE 7.12

Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: Ammonium

Two of the top 50 chemicals produced in the United States, ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate, both used as fertilizers, contain the ammonium ion. Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of the  cation.

Solution

We write the Lewis structure of  as:

We can see that  contains four bonds from the nitrogen atom to hydrogen atoms and no lone pairs. We expect the four regions of high electron density to arrange themselves so that they point to the corners of a tetrahedron with the central nitrogen atom in the middle (Figure 7.19). Therefore, the electron pair geometry of  is tetrahedral, and the molecular structure is also tetrahedral (Figure 7.22).

Check Your Learning

Identify a molecule with trigonal bipyramidal molecular structure.

Answer:

Any molecule with five electron pairs around the central atoms including no lone pairs will be trigonal bipyramidal.  is a common example.

The next several examples illustrate the effect of lone pairs of electrons on molecular structure.

EXAMPLE 7.13

Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: Lone Pairs on the Central Atom

redict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of a water molecule.

Solution

The Lewis structure of  indicates that there are four regions of high electron density around the oxygen atom: two lone pairs and two chemical bonds:

We predict that these four regions are arranged in a tetrahedral fashion (Figure 7.23), as indicated in Figure 7.19. Thus, the electron-pair geometry is tetrahedral and the molecular structure is bent with an angle slightly less than  . In fact, the bond angle is  .

Check Your Learning

The hydronium ion,  , forms when acids are dissolved in water. Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of this cation.

Answer:

electron pair geometry: tetrahedral; molecular structure: trigonal pyramidal

EXAMPLE 7.14

Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: 

Sulfur tetrafluoride,  , is extremely valuable for the preparation of fluorine-containing compounds used as herbicides (i.e.,  is used as a fluorinating agent). Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of a  molecule.

Solution

The Lewis structure of  indicates five regions of electron density around the sulfur atom: one lone pair and four bonding pairs:

We expect these five regions to adopt a trigonal bipyramidal electron-pair geometry. To minimize lone pair repulsions, the lone pair occupies one of the equatorial positions. The molecular structure (Figure 7.24) is that of a seesaw (Figure 7.19).

Check Your Learning

Predict the electron pair geometry and molecular structure for molecules of  .

Answer: The electron-pair geometry is trigonal bipyramidal. The molecular structure is linear.

EXAMPLE 7.15

Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: 

Of all the noble gases, xenon is the most reactive, frequently reacting with elements such as oxygen and fluorine. Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of the  molecule.

Solution

The Lewis structure of  indicates six regions of high electron density around the xenon atom: two lone pairs and four bonds:

These six regions adopt an octahedral arrangement (Figure 7.19), which is the electron-pair geometry. To minimize repulsions, the lone pairs should be on opposite sides of the central atom (Figure 7.25). The five atoms are all in the same plane and have a square planar molecular structure.

Check Your Learning

In a certain molecule, the central atom has three lone pairs and two bonds. What will the electron pair geometry and molecular structure be?

Answer:

electron pair geometry: trigonal bipyramidal; molecular structure: linear

Molecular Structure for Multicenter Molecules

When a molecule or polyatomic ion has only one central atom, the molecular structure completely describes the shape of the molecule. Larger molecules do not have a single central atom, but are connected by a chain of interior atoms that each possess a “local” geometry. The way these local structures are oriented with respect to each other also influences the molecular shape, but such considerations are largely beyond the scope of this introductory discussion. For our purposes, we will only focus on determining the local structures.

EXAMPLE 7.16

Predicting Structure in Multicenter Molecules

The Lewis structure for the simplest amino acid, glycine,  , is shown here. Predict the local geometry for the nitrogen atom, the two carbon atoms, and the oxygen atom with a hydrogen atom attached:

Solution

Consider each central atom independently. The electron-pair geometries:

• nitrogen––four regions of electron density; tetrahedral • carbon  ––four regions of electron density; tetrahedral • carbon  —three regions of electron density; trigonal planar • oxygen (OH)—four regions of electron density; tetrahedral

The local structures:

• nitrogen––three bonds, one lone pair; trigonal pyramidal   
• carbon  )—four bonds, no lone pairs; tetrahedral   
• carbon  —three bonds (double bond counts as one bond), no lone pairs; trigonal planar   
• oxygen (OH)—two bonds, two lone pairs; bent 

Check Your Learning

Another amino acid is alanine, which has the Lewis structure shown here. Predict the electron-pair geometry and local structure of the nitrogen atom, the three carbon atoms, and the oxygen atom with hydrogen attached:

Answer:

electron-pair geometries: nitrogen––tetrahedral; carbon (CH)—tetrahedral; carbon  —tetrahedral; carbon  —trigonal planar; oxygen (OH)—tetrahedral; local structures: nitrogen—trigonal pyramidal; carbon (CH)—tetrahedral; carbon  —tetrahedral; carbon  )—trigonal planar; oxygen (OH)—bent 

LINK TO LEARNING

The molecular shape simulator (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape) lets you build various molecules and practice naming their electron-pair geometries and molecular structures.

EXAMPLE 7.17

Molecular Simulation

Using molecular shape simulator (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape) allows us to control whether bond angles and/or lone pairs are displayed by checking or unchecking the boxes under “Options” on the right. We can also use the “Name” checkboxes at bottom-left to display or hide the electron pair geometry (called “electron geometry” in the simulator) and/or molecular structure (called “molecular shape” in the simulator).

Build the molecule HCN in the simulator based on the following Lewis structure:

Click on each bond type or lone pair at right to add that group to the central atom. Once you have the complete molecule, rotate it to examine the predicted molecular structure. What molecular structure is this?

Solution

The molecular structure is linear.

Check Your Learning

Build a more complex molecule in the simulator. Identify the electron-group geometry, molecular structure, and bond angles. Then try to find a chemical formula that would match the structure you have drawn.

Answer:

Answers will vary. For example, an atom with four single bonds, a double bond, and a lone pair has an octahedral electron-group geometry and a square pyramidal molecular structure.  is a molecule that adopts this structure.

Molecular Polarity and Dipole Moment

As discussed previously, polar covalent bonds connect two atoms with differing electronegativities, leaving one atom with a partial positive charge  and the other atom with a partial negative charge  , as the electrons are pulled toward the more electronegative atom. This separation of charge gives rise to a bond dipole moment. The magnitude of a bond dipole moment is represented by the Greek letter mu  and is given by the formula shown here, where Q is the magnitude of the partial charges (determined by the electronegativity difference) and r is the distance between the charges:

This bond moment can be represented as a vector, a quantity having both direction and magnitude (Figure 7.26). Dipole vectors are shown as arrows pointing along the bond from the less electronegative atom toward the more electronegative atom. A small plus sign is drawn on the less electronegative end to indicate the partially positive end of the bond. The length of the arrow is proportional to the magnitude of the electronegativity difference between the two atoms.

A whole molecule may also have a separation of charge, depending on its molecular structure and the polarity of each of its bonds. If such a charge separation exists, the molecule is said to be a polar molecule (or dipole); otherwise the molecule is said to be nonpolar. The dipole moment measures the extent of net charge separation in the molecule as a whole. We determine the dipole moment by adding the bond moments in three-dimensional space, taking into account the molecular structure.

For diatomic molecules, there is only one bond, so its bond dipole moment determines the molecular polarity. Homonuclear diatomic molecules such as  and  have no difference in electronegativity, so their dipole moment is zero. For heteronuclear molecules such as CO, there is a small dipole moment. For HF, there is a larger dipole moment because there is a larger difference in electronegativity.

When a molecule contains more than one bond, the geometry must be taken into account. If the bonds in a molecule are arranged such that their bond moments cancel (vector sum equals zero), then the molecule is nonpolar. This is the situation in  (Figure 7.27). Each of the bonds is polar, but the molecule as a whole is nonpolar. From the Lewis structure, and using VSEPR theory, we determine that the  molecule is linear with polar  bonds on opposite sides of the carbon atom. The bond moments cancel because they are pointed in opposite directions. In the case of the water molecule (Figure 7.27), the Lewis structure again shows that there are two bonds to a central atom, and the electronegativity difference again shows that each of these bonds has a nonzero bond moment. In this case, however, the molecular structure is bent because of the lone pairs on O, and the two bond moments do not cancel. Therefore, water does have a net dipole moment and is a polar molecule (dipole).

The OCS molecule has a structure similar to  , but a sulfur atom has replaced one of the oxygen atoms. To determine if this molecule is polar, we draw the molecular structure. VSEPR theory predicts a linear molecule:

Overall dipole moment

The C-O bond is considerably polar. Although C and S have very similar electronegativity values, S is slightly more electronegative than C, and so the C-S bond is just slightly polar. Because oxygen is more electronegative than sulfur, the oxygen end of the molecule is the negative end.

Chloromethane,  , is a tetrahedral molecule with three slightly polar C-H bonds and a more polar C-Cl bond. The relative electronegativities of the bonded atoms is  , and so the bond moments all point toward the Cl end of the molecule and sum to yield a considerable dipole moment (the molecules are relatively polar).

For molecules of high symmetry such as  (trigonal planar),  (tetrahedral),  (trigonal bipyramidal), and  (octahedral), all the bonds are of identical polarity (same bond moment) and they are oriented in geometries that yield nonpolar molecules (dipole moment is zero). Molecules of less geometric symmetry, however, may be polar even when all bond moments are identical. For these molecules, the directions of the equal bond moments are such that they sum to give a nonzero dipole moment and a polar molecule. Examples of such molecules include hydrogen sulfide,  (nonlinear), and ammonia,  (trigonal pyramidal).

To summarize, to be polar, a molecule must:

1. Contain at least one polar covalent bond.   
2. Have a molecular structure such that the sum of the vectors of each bond dipole moment does not cancel.

Properties of Polar Molecules

Polar molecules tend to align when placed in an electric field with the positive end of the molecule oriented toward the negative plate and the negative end toward the positive plate (Figure 7.28). We can use an electrically charged object to attract polar molecules, but nonpolar molecules are not attracted. Also, polar solvents are better at dissolving polar substances, and nonpolar solvents are better at dissolving nonpolar substances.

LINK TO LEARNING

The molecule polarity simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecPolarity) provides many ways to explore dipole moments of bonds and molecules.

EXAMPLE 7.18

Polarity Simulations

Open the molecule polarity simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecPolarity) and select the “Three Atoms” tab at the top. This should display a molecule ABC with three electronegativity adjustors. You can display or hide the bond moments, molecular dipoles, and partial charges at the right. Turning on the Electric Field will show whether the molecule moves when exposed to a field, similar to Figure 7.28.

Use the electronegativity controls to determine how the molecular dipole will look for the starting bent molecule if:

(a) A and C are very electronegative and B is in the middle of the range.   
(b) A is very electronegative, and B and C are not.

Solution

(a) Molecular dipole moment points immediately between A and C.   
(b) Molecular dipole moment points along the A–B bond, toward A.

Check Your Learning

Determine the partial charges that will give the largest possible bond dipoles.

Answer:

The largest bond moments will occur with the largest partial charges. The two solutions above represent how unevenly the electrons are shared in the bond. The bond moments will be maximized when the electronegativity difference is greatest. The controls for A and C should be set to one extreme, and B should be set to the opposite extreme. Although the magnitude of the bond moment will not change based on whether B is the most electronegative or the least, the direction of the bond moment will.

Key Terms

axial position location in a trigonal bipyramidal geometry in which there is another atom at a  angle and the equatorial positions are at a  angle   
bond angle angle between any two covalent bonds that share a common atom   
bond dipole moment separation of charge in a bond that depends on the difference in electronegativity and the bond distance represented by partial charges or a vector   
bond distance (also, bond length) distance between the nuclei of two bonded atoms   
bond energy (also, bond dissociation energy) energy required to break a covalent bond in a gaseous substance   
bond length distance between the nuclei of two bonded atoms at which the lowest potential energy is achieved   
Born-Haber cycle thermochemical cycle relating the various energetic steps involved in the formation of an ionic solid from the relevant elements   
covalent bond bond formed when electrons are shared between atoms   
dipole moment property of a molecule that describes the separation of charge determined by the sum of the individual bond moments based on the molecular structure   
double bond covalent bond in which two pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms   
electron-pair geometry arrangement around a central atom of all regions of electron density (bonds, lone pairs, or unpaired electrons)   
electronegativity tendency of an atom to attract electrons in a bond to itself   
equatorial position one of the three positions in a trigonal bipyramidal geometry with  angles between them; the axial positions are located at a  angle   
formal charge charge that would result on an atom by taking the number of valence electrons on the neutral atom and subtracting the nonbonding electrons and the number of bonds (one-half of the bonding electrons)   
free radical molecule that contains an odd number of electrons   
hypervalent molecule molecule containing at least one main group element that has more than eight electrons in its valence shell   
inert pair effect tendency of heavy atoms to form ions in which their valence  electrons are not lost   
ionic bond strong electrostatic force of attraction between cations and anions in an ionic compound   
lattice energy  energy required to separate one mole of an ionic solid into its component gaseous ions   
Lewis structure diagram showing lone pairs and bonding pairs of electrons in a molecule or an ion   
Lewis symbol symbol for an element or monatomic ion that uses a dot to represent each valence electron in the element or ion   
linear shape in which two outside groups are placed on opposite sides of a central atom   
lone pair two (a pair of) valence electrons that are not used to form a covalent bond   
molecular structure arrangement of atoms in a molecule or ion   
molecular structure structure that includes only the placement of the atoms in the molecule   
octahedral shape in which six outside groups are placed around a central atom such that a threedimensional shape is generated with four groups forming a square and the other two forming the apex of two pyramids, one above and one below the square plane   
octet rule guideline that states main group atoms will form structures in which eight valence electrons interact with each nucleus, counting bonding electrons as interacting with both atoms connected by the bond   
polar covalent bond covalent bond between atoms of different electronegativities; a covalent bond with a positive end and a negative end   
polar molecule (also, dipole) molecule with an overall dipole moment   
pure covalent bond (also, nonpolar covalent bond) covalent bond between atoms of identical electronegativities   
resonance situation in which one Lewis structure is insufficient to describe the bonding in a molecule and the average of multiple structures is observed   
resonance forms two or more Lewis structures that have the same arrangement of atoms but different arrangements of electrons   
resonance hybrid average of the resonance forms shown by the individual Lewis structures   
single bond bond in which a single pair of electrons is shared between two atoms   
tetrahedral shape in which four outside groups are placed around a central atom such that a threedimensional shape is generated with four corners and  angles between each pair and the central atom   
trigonal bipyramidal shape in which five outside groups are placed around a central atom such that three form a flat triangle with  angles between each pair and the central atom, and the other two form the apex of two pyramids, one above and one below the triangular plane   
trigonal planar shape in which three outside groups are placed in a flat triangle around a central atom with  angles between each pair

and the central atom triple bond bond in which three pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms valence shell electron-pair repulsion theory (VSEPR) theory used to predict the bond angles in a molecule based on positioning regions of high electron density as far apart as possible to minimize electrostatic repulsion vector quantity having magnitude and direction

Key Equations

formal charge  valence shell electrons (free atom) - # lone pair electrons  # bonding electrons   
Bond energy for a diatomic molecule:    
Enthalpy change:  bonds broken – ƩDbonds formed   
Lattice energy for a solid MX:    
Lattice energy for an ionic crystal: 

Summary

7.1 Ionic Bonding

Atoms gain or lose electrons to form ions with particularly stable electron configurations. The charges of cations formed by the representative metals may be determined readily because, with few exceptions, the electronic structures of these ions have either a noble gas configuration or a completely filled electron shell. The charges of anions formed by the nonmetals may also be readily determined because these ions form when nonmetal atoms gain enough electrons to fill their valence shells.

7.2 Covalent Bonding

Covalent bonds form when electrons are shared between atoms and are attracted by the nuclei of both atoms. In pure covalent bonds, the electrons are shared equally. In polar covalent bonds, the electrons are shared unequally, as one atom exerts a stronger force of attraction on the electrons than the other. The ability of an atom to attract a pair of electrons in a chemical bond is called its electronegativity. The difference in electronegativity between two atoms determines how polar a bond will be. In a diatomic molecule with two identical atoms, there is no difference in electronegativity, so the bond is nonpolar or pure covalent. When the electronegativity difference is very large, as is the case between metals and nonmetals, the bonding is characterized as ionic.

7.3 Lewis Symbols and Structures

Valence electronic structures can be visualized by drawing Lewis symbols (for atoms and monatomic ions) and Lewis structures (for molecules and polyatomic ions). Lone pairs, unpaired electrons, and single, double, or triple bonds are used to indicate where the valence electrons are located around each atom in a Lewis structure. Most structures—especially those containing second row elements—obey the octet rule, in which every atom (except H) is surrounded by eight electrons. Exceptions to the octet rule occur for odd-electron molecules (free radicals), electron-deficient molecules, and hypervalent molecules.

7.4 Formal Charges and Resonance

In a Lewis structure, formal charges can be assigned to each atom by treating each bond as if one-half of the electrons are assigned to each atom. These hypothetical formal charges are a guide to determining the most appropriate Lewis structure. A structure in which the formal charges are as close to zero as possible is preferred. Resonance occurs in cases where two or more Lewis structures with identical arrangements of atoms but different distributions of electrons can be written. The actual distribution of electrons (the resonance hybrid) is an average of the distribution indicated by the individual Lewis structures (the resonance forms).

7.5 Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds

The strength of a covalent bond is measured by its bond dissociation energy, that is, the amount of energy required to break that particular bond in a mole of molecules. Multiple bonds are stronger than single bonds between the same atoms. The enthalpy of a reaction can be estimated based on the energy input required to break bonds and the energy released when new bonds are formed. For ionic bonds, the lattice energy is the energy required to separate one mole of a compound into its gas phase ions. Lattice energy increases for ions with higher charges and shorter distances between ions. Lattice energies are often calculated using the Born-Haber cycle, a thermochemical cycle including all of the energetic steps involved in converting elements into an ionic compound.

7.6 Molecular Structure and Polarity

VSEPR theory predicts the three-dimensional arrangement of atoms in a molecule. It states that valence electrons will assume an electron-pair geometry that minimizes repulsions between areas of high electron density (bonds and/or lone pairs). Molecular structure, which refers only to the placement of atoms in a molecule and not the electrons, is equivalent to electron-pair geometry only when there are no lone electron pairs around the central atom. A dipole moment measures a separation of charge. For one bond, the bond dipole moment is determined by the difference in electronegativity between the two atoms. For a molecule, the overall dipole moment is determined by both the individual bond moments and how these dipoles are arranged in the molecular structure. Polar molecules (those with an appreciable dipole moment) interact with electric fields, whereas nonpolar molecules do not.

Exercises

7.1 Ionic Bonding

1. Does a cation gain protons to form a positive charge or does it lose electrons?   
2. Iron(III) sulfate  is composed of  and  ions. Explain why a sample of iron(III) sulfate is uncharged.   
3. Which of the following atoms would be expected to form negative ions in binary ionic compounds and which would be expected to form positive ions: P, I, Mg, Cl, In, Cs, O, Pb, Co?   
4. Which of the following atoms would be expected to form negative ions in binary ionic compounds and which would be expected to form positive ions: Br, Ca, Na, N, F, Al, Sn, S, Cd?   
5. Predict the charge on the monatomic ions formed from the following atoms in binary ionic compounds: (a) P (b) Mg (c) Al (d) O (e) Cl (f ) Cs

6. Predict the charge on the monatomic ions formed from the following atoms in binary ionic compounds:

(a) I (b) Sr (c) K (d) N (e) S (f ) In

7. Write the electron configuration for each of the following ions:

(a)   (c) Be2+(d) Cd2+(e) O2–(f) Ga3+(g)  (h) N3–(i) Sn2+(j) Co2+(k) Fe2+(l) As3+

8. Write the electron configuration for the monatomic ions formed from the following elements (which form the greatest concentration of monatomic ions in seawater):

(a) Cl (b) Na (c) Mg (d) Ca (e) K (f ) Br (g) Sr (h) F

9. Write out the full electron configuration for each of the following atoms and for the monatomic ion found in binary ionic compounds containing the element:

(a) Al (b) Br (c) Sr (d) Li (e) As (f ) S

10. From the labels of several commercial products, prepare a list of six ionic compounds in the products. For each compound, write the formula. (You may need to look up some formulas in a suitable reference.)

7.2 Covalent Bonding

11. Why is it incorrect to speak of a molecule of solid NaCl?

12. What information can you use to predict whether a bond between two atoms is covalent or ionic?   
13. Predict which of the following compounds are ionic and which are covalent, based on the location of their constituent atoms in the periodic table: (a)  (b) MnO (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) CO (g)  (h) HI (i) CaO (j) IBr (k) 

14. Explain the difference between a nonpolar covalent bond, a polar covalent bond, and an ionic bond.

15. From its position in the periodic table, determine which atom in each pair is more electronegative:

(a) Br or Cl (b) N or O (c) S or O (d) P or S (e) Si or N (f ) Ba or P (g) N or K

16. From its position in the periodic table, determine which atom in each pair is more electronegative:

(a) N or P (b) N or Ge (c) S or F (d) Cl or S (e) H or C (f ) Se or P (g) C or Si

17. From their positions in the periodic table, arrange the atoms in each of the following series in order of increasing electronegativity:

(a) C, F, H, N, O (b) Br, Cl, F, H, I (c) F, H, O, P, S (d) Al, H, Na, O, P (e) Ba, H, N, O, As

18. From their positions in the periodic table, arrange the atoms in each of the following series in order of increasing electronegativity: (a) As, H, N, P, Sb (b) Cl, H, P, S, Si (c) Br, Cl, Ge, H, Sr (d) Ca, H, K, N, Si (e) Cl, Cs, Ge, H, Sr

19. Which atoms can bond to sulfur so as to produce a positive partial charge on the sulfur atom?

20. Which is the most polar bond?

(a) C–C (b) C–H (c) N–H (d) O–H (e) Se–H

21. Identify the more polar bond in each of the following pairs of bonds:

(a) HF or HCl (b) NO or CO (c) SH or OH (d) PCl or SCl (e) CH or NH (f) SO or PO (g) CN or NN

22. Which of the following molecules or ions contain polar bonds?

(a)  (b)  (c) (d)  (e)  (f )  (g) 

7.3 Lewis Symbols and Structures

23. Write the Lewis symbols for each of the following ions:

(a) As3– (b)  (c) Be2+ (d) O2– (e) Ga3+ (f )  (g) N3– (a) Cl (b) Na (c)  (d) Ca (e) K (f ) Br (g) Sr (h) F

25. Write the Lewis symbols of the ions in each of the following ionic compounds and the Lewis symbols of the atom from which they are formed:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) KF

26. In the Lewis structures listed here, M and X represent various elements in the third period of the periodic table. Write the formula of each compound using the chemical symbols of each element:

(a) [m2][x²   
(b) [][x]   
(c) [m-][x]   
(d) [][x]

27. Write the Lewis structure for the diatomic molecule  , an unstable form of phosphorus found in hightemperature phosphorus vapor.

28. Write Lewis structures for the following:

(a)    
(b) HBr   
(c)    
(d)    
(e)    
(f) HNNH   
(g)    
(h)    
(i)    
(j) CO   
(k) CN–

29. Write Lewis structures for the following:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d) ClNO (e)  (f )  (g) (h)  (i) HCCH (j) ClCN (k)

30. Write Lewis structures for the following:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

31. Write Lewis structures for the following: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (contains a B–B bond)

32. Write Lewis structures for: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) HONO

33. Correct the following statement: “The bonds in solid  are ionic; the bond in a HCl molecule is covalent. Thus, all of the valence electrons in  are located on the  ions, and all of the valence electrons in a HCl molecule are shared between the H and Cl atoms.”

34. Write Lewis structures for the following molecules or ions: (a)  (b)  (c)  (a cyclic molecule with a ring of eight Se atoms)

35. Methanol,  , is used as the fuel in some race cars. Ethanol,  , is used extensively as motor fuel in Brazil. Both methanol and ethanol produce  and  when they burn. Write the chemical equations for these combustion reactions using Lewis structures instead of chemical formulas.

36. Many planets in our solar system contain organic chemicals including methane  and traces of ethylene  , ethane  , propyne  , and diacetylene (HCCCCH). Write the Lewis structures for each of these molecules.

37. Carbon tetrachloride was formerly used in fire extinguishers for electrical fires. It is no longer used for this purpose because of the formation of the toxic gas phosgene,  . Write the Lewis structures for carbon tetrachloride and phosgene.

38. Identify the atoms that correspond to each of the following electron configurations. Then, write the Lewis symbol for the common ion formed from each atom: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) 

39. The arrangement of atoms in several biologically important molecules is given here. Complete the Lewis structures of these molecules by adding multiple bonds and lone pairs. Do not add any more atoms. (a) the amino acid serine:

0 1 H丨o丨c丨o丨H

40. A compound with a molar mass of about  contains  carbon and  hydrogen by mass. Write the Lewis structure for a molecule of the compound.   
41. A compound with a molar mass of about  contains  carbon and  hydrogen by mass. Write the Lewis structure for a molecule of the compound.   
42. Two arrangements of atoms are possible for a compound with a molar mass of about  that contains  ,  , and  O by mass. Write the Lewis structures for the two molecules.   
43. How are single, double, and triple bonds similar? How do they differ?

7.4 Formal Charges and Resonance

44. Write resonance forms that describe the distribution of electrons in each of these molecules or ions.

(a) selenium dioxide, OSeO   
(b) nitrate ion,    
(c) nitric acid,  (N is bonded to an OH group and two O atoms)   
(d) benzene,  :

(e) the formate ion:

45. Write resonance forms that describe the distribution of electrons in each of these molecules or ions.

(a) sulfur dioxide,    
(b) carbonate ion,    
(c) hydrogen carbonate ion,  (C is bonded to an OH group and two O atoms)   
(d) pyridine:

(e) the allyl ion:

46. Write the resonance forms of ozone,  , the component of the upper atmosphere that protects the Earth from ultraviolet radiation.

47. Sodium nitrite, which has been used to preserve bacon and other meats, is an ionic compound. Write the resonance forms of the nitrite ion, 

48. In terms of the bonds present, explain why acetic acid,  , contains two distinct types of carbonoxygen bonds, whereas the acetate ion, formed by loss of a hydrogen ion from acetic acid, only contains one type of carbon-oxygen bond. The skeleton structures of these species are shown:

49. Write the Lewis structures for the following, and include resonance structures where appropriate. Indicate which has the strongest carbon-oxygen bond.

(a)  (b) CO

50. Toothpastes containing sodium hydrogen carbonate (sodium bicarbonate) and hydrogen peroxide are widely used. Write Lewis structures for the hydrogen carbonate ion and hydrogen peroxide molecule, with resonance forms where appropriate.

51. Determine the formal charge of each element in the following:

(a) HCl (b)  (c)  (d) 

52. Determine the formal charge of each element in the following: (a)  (b) (c)  (d) (e) 

53. Calculate the formal charge of chlorine in the molecules  ,  , and  .

54. Calculate the formal charge of each element in the following compounds and ions:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g)  (h)

55. Draw all possible resonance structures for each of these compounds. Determine the formal charge on each atom in each of the resonance structures:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

56. Based on formal charge considerations, which of the following would likely be the correct arrangement of atoms in nitrosyl chloride: ClNO or ClON?

57. Based on formal charge considerations, which of the following would likely be the correct arrangement of atoms in hypochlorous acid: HOCl or OClH?

58. Based on formal charge considerations, which of the following would likely be the correct arrangement of atoms in sulfur dioxide: OSO or SOO?

59. Draw the structure of hydroxylamine,  , and assign formal charges; look up the structure. Is the actua structure consistent with the formal charges?

60. Iodine forms a series of fluorides (listed here). Write Lewis structures for each of the four compounds and determine the formal charge of the iodine atom in each molecule: (a) IF (b)  (c)  (d) 

61. Write the Lewis structure and chemical formula of the compound with a molar mass of about  that contains  nitrogen and  fluorine by mass, and determine the formal charge of the atoms in this compound.

62. Which of the following structures would we expect for nitrous acid? Determine the formal charges: H :0 -N= =O or H O- IN=O

63. Sulfuric acid is the industrial chemical produced in greatest quantity worldwide. About 90 billion pounds are produced each year in the United States alone. Write the Lewis structure for sulfuric acid,  , which has two oxygen atoms and two OH groups bonded to the sulfur.

7.5 Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds

64. Which bond in each of the following pairs of bonds is the strongest?

(a) C–C or  (b)  or   or  (d)  or H–Cl (e) C–H or  (f) C–N or C–O

65. Using the bond energies in Table 7.2, determine the approximate enthalpy change for each of the following reactions: (a)  (b)  (c) 

66. Using the bond energies in Table 7.2, determine the approximate enthalpy change for each of the following reactions: (a)  (b)  (c) 

67. When a molecule can form two different structures, the structure with the stronger bonds is usually the more stable form. Use bond energies to predict the correct structure of the hydroxylamine molecule:

68. How does the bond energy of  differ from the standard enthalpy of formation of HCl(g)?

69. Using the standard enthalpy of formation data in Appendix G, show how the standard enthalpy of formation of  can be used to determine the bond energy.   
70. Using the standard enthalpy of formation data in Appendix G, calculate the bond energy of the carbonsulfur double bond in  .   
71. Using the standard enthalpy of formation data in Appendix G, determine which bond is stronger: the S–F bond in  or in    
72. Using the standard enthalpy of formation data in Appendix G, determine which bond is stronger: the P–Cl bond in  or in 

73. Complete the following Lewis structure by adding bonds (not atoms), and then indicate the longest bond:

74. Use the bond energy to calculate an approximate value of  for the following reaction. Which is the more stable form of  ?

75. Use principles of atomic structure to answer each of the following:1

(a) The radius of the Ca atom is  ; the radius of the  ion is  . Account for the difference. (b) The lattice energy of CaO(s) is  ; the lattice energy of  is  . Account for the difference.   
(c) Given these ionization values, explain the difference between Ca and K with regard to their first and secon ionization energies.

(d) The first ionization energy of  is  and that of Al is  . Account for this difference.

76. The lattice energy of LiF is  , and the Li–F distance is  . NaF crystallizes in the same structure as LiF but with a  distance of  . Which of the following values most closely approximates the lattice energy of NaF: 510, 890, 1023, 1175, or  Explain your choice.

77. For which of the following substances is the least energy required to convert one mole of the solid into separate ions?

(a) MgO (b) SrO (c) KF (d) CsF (e) 

78. The reaction of a metal, M, with a halogen,  , proceeds by an exothermic reaction as indicated by this equation:  For each of the following, indicate which option will make the reaction more exothermic. Explain your answers. (a) a large radius vs. a small radius for  (b) a high ionization energy vs. a low ionization energy for M (c) an increasing bond energy for the halogen (d) a decreasing electron affinity for the halogen (e) an increasing size of the anion formed by the halogen

79. The lattice energy of LiF is  , and the Li–F distance is 201 pm.  crystallizes in the same structure as LiF but with a  distance of  . Which of the following values most closely approximates the lattice energy of MgO: 256 kJ/mol,  ,  /mol, 2046 kJ/mol, or  mol? Explain your choice.

80. Which compound in each of the following pairs has the larger lattice energy? Note:  and  have similar radii;  and  have similar radii. Explain your choices. (a)  or MgSe (b) LiF or  (c)  or LiCl (d)  or 

81. Which compound in each of the following pairs has the larger lattice energy? Note:  and  have similar radii;  and  have similar radii. Explain your choices.

(a)  or  (b)  or BaS (c) KCl or BaS (d) BaS or 

82. Which of the following compounds requires the most energy to convert one mole of the solid into separate ions?

(a)  (b) SrO (c) KF (d) CsF (e) 

83. Which of the following compounds requires the most energy to convert one mole of the solid into separate ions?

(a)  (b)  (c) CaS (d)  (e) CaO

84. The lattice energy of KF is  , and the interionic distance is  . The Na–F distance in NaF, which has the same structure as KF, is  . Which of the following values is the closest approximation of the lattice energy of NaF: 682 kJ/mol, 794 kJ/mol, 924 kJ/mol, 1588 kJ/mol, or  Explain your answer.

7.6 Molecular Structure and Polarity

85. Explain why the HOH molecule is bent, whereas the HBeH molecule is linear.

86. What feature of a Lewis structure can be used to tell if a molecule’s (or ion’s) electron-pair geometry and molecular structure will be identical?

87. Explain the difference between electron-pair geometry and molecular structure.

88. Why is the  angle in  smaller than the H–C–H bond angle in  Why is the H–N–H angle in  identical to the  bond angle in  ?

89. Explain how a molecule that contains polar bonds can be nonpolar.

90. As a general rule,  molecules (where M represents a central atom and X represents terminal atoms; n  ) are polar if there is one or more lone pairs of electrons on M.   ,  ,  ) is an example. There are two molecular structures with lone pairs that are exceptions to this rule. What are they?

91. Predict the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following molecules or ions: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

92. Identify the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following molecules or ions:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) 

93. What are the electron-pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following molecules or ions?

(a)  (b)  (c) (d)  (e)  (f ) 

94. Predict the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following ions:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g) 

95. Identify the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following molecules: (a) ClNO (N is the central atom) (b)  (c)  (C is the central atom) (d)  (S is the central atom) (e)  (S is the central atom) (f )  (Xe is the central atom) (g)  (Cl is the central atom)

96. Predict the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following: (a)  (I is the central atom) (b)  (P is the central atom) (c)  (Se is the central atom) (d)  (S is the central atom) (e)  (S is the central atom) (f )  (g) 

97. Which of the following molecules and ions contain polar bonds? Which of these molecules and ions have dipole moments?

(a)  (b)  (c) (d)  (e)  (f )  (g) 

98. Which of these molecules and ions contain polar bonds? Which of these molecules and ions have dipole moments? (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g) 

99. Which of the following molecules have dipole moments? (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (P is the central atom) (e) ClNO (N is the central atom)

100. Identify the molecules with a dipole moment:

(a)    
(b)    
(c)    
(d)    
(e) 

101. The molecule  has a dipole moment. Is X boron or phosphorus?

102. The molecule  has a dipole moment. Is X beryllium or sulfur?

103. Is the  molecule polar or nonpolar?

104. There are three possible structures for  with phosphorus as the central atom. Draw them and discuss how measurements of dipole moments could help distinguish among them.

105. Describe the molecular structure around the indicated atom or atoms:

(a) the sulfur atom in sulfuric acid,  (b) the chlorine atom in chloric acid,  (c) the oxygen atom in hydrogen peroxide, HOOH (d) the nitrogen atom in nitric acid,  (e) the oxygen atom in the OH group in nitric acid,  (f) the central oxygen atom in the ozone molecule,  (g) each of the carbon atoms in propyne,  (h) the carbon atom in Freon,  (i) each of the carbon atoms in allene, 

106. Draw the Lewis structures and predict the shape of each compound or ion: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

107. A molecule with the formula  , in which A and B represent different atoms, could have one of thre different shapes. Sketch and name the three different shapes that this molecule might have. Give an example of a molecule or ion for each shape.

108. A molecule with the formula  , in which A and B represent different atoms, could have one of three different shapes. Sketch and name the three different shapes that this molecule might have. Give an example of a molecule or ion that has each shape.

109. Draw the Lewis electron dot structures for these molecules, including resonance structures where appropriate: (a)  (b)  (c) CS (d) predict the molecular shapes for  and  and explain how you arrived at your predictions

111. A compound with a molar mass of about  contains  carbon and  hydrogen. What is its molecular structure?

112. Use the simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecPolarity) to perform the following exercises for a twoatom molecule: (a) Adjust the electronegativity value so the bond dipole is pointing toward B. Then determine what the electronegativity values must be to switch the dipole so that it points toward A. (b) With a partial positive charge on A, turn on the electric field and describe what happens. (c) With a small partial negative charge on A, turn on the electric field and describe what happens. (d) Reset all, and then with a large partial negative charge on A, turn on the electric field and describe what happens.

113. Use the simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecPolarity) to perform the following exercises for a real molecule. You may need to rotate the molecules in three dimensions to see certain dipoles. (a) Sketch the bond dipoles and molecular dipole (if any) for  . Explain your observations. (b) Look at the bond dipoles for  . Use these dipoles to predict whether N or H is more electronegative. (c) Predict whether there should be a molecular dipole for  and, if so, in which direction it will point. Check the molecular dipole box to test your hypothesis.

114. Use the Molecule Shape simulator (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape) to build a molecule. Starting with the central atom, click on the double bond to add one double bond. Then add one single bond and one lone pair. Rotate the molecule to observe the complete geometry. Name the electron group geometry and molecular structure and predict the bond angle. Then click the check boxes at the bottom and right of the simulator to check your answers.

115. Use the Molecule Shape simulator (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape) to explore real molecules. On the Real Molecules tab, select  . Switch between the “real” and “model” modes. Explain the difference observed.

116. Use the Molecule Shape simulator (http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape) to explore real molecules. On the Real Molecules tab, select “model” mode and  . What is the model bond angle? Explain whether the “real” bond angle should be larger or smaller than the ideal model angle.