8.3 Area of a Surface of Revolution

This section starts by constructing surfaces. A curve  is revolved around an axis. That produces a “surface of revolution,” which is symmetric around the axis. If we revolve a sloping line, the result is a cone. When the line is parallel to the axis we get a cylinder (a pipe). By revolving a curve we might get a lamp or a lamp shade (or even the light bulb).

Section 8.1 computed the volume inside that surface. This section computes the surface area. Previously we cut the solid into slices or shells. Now we need a good way to cut up the surface.

The key idea is to revolve short straight line segments. Their slope is  : They can be the same pieces of length  that were used to find length—now we compute area. When revolved, a straight piece produces a “thin band” (Figure 8.10). The curved surface, from revolving  , is close to the bands. The first step is to compute the surface area of a band.

A small comment: Curved surfaces can also be cut into tiny patches. Each patch is nearly flat, like a little square. The sum of those patches leads to a double integral (with  ). Here the integral stays one-dimensional (  or  or  ). Surfaces of revolution are special—we approximate them by bands that go all the way around. A band is just a belt with a slope, and its slope has an effect on its area.

Revolve a small straight piece (length  not  ). The center of the piece goes around a circle of radius  : The band is  slice of a cone. When we flatten it out (Problems 11 13) we discover its area. The area is the side length  times the middle circumference  :

For revolution around the  axis, the radius is  : For revolution around the  axis, the radius is the height:  : Figure 8.10 shows both bands—the problem tells us which to use. The sum of band areas  is close to the area  of the curved surface. Inathe limit we integrate  :

8C The surface area generated by revolving the curve  between  and  is

EXAMPLE 1 Revolve a complete semicircle  around the  axis.

The surface of revolution is a sphere. Its area (known!) is  : The limits on  are  and  : The slope of  is  :

EXAMPLE 2 Revolve a piece of the straight line  around the  axis.

The surface is a cone with  : The band from  to  has area  :

This answer must agree with the formula  (which it came from). The line from  to  has length  : Its mid-point is  : Around the  axis, the middle radius is  and the area is  :

EXAMPLE 3 Revolve the same straight line segment around the  axis. Now the radius is  instead of  : The area in Example 2 is cut in half:

For surfaces as for arc length, only a few examples have convenient answers. Watermelons and basketballs and light bulbs are in the exercises. Rather than stretching out this section, we give a final area formula and show how to use it.

The formula applies when there is a parameter t: Instead of  the points on the curve are  : As  varies, we move along the curve. The length formula  is expressed in terms of  .

For the surface of revolution around the  axis, the area becomes a  -integral:

EXAMPLE 4 The point  travels on a circle with center at  : Revolving that circle around the  axis produces a doughnut. Find its surface area.

Solution  : The circle is complete at  :