18.8 Applications of Electrostatics

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

The study of electrostatics has proven useful in many areas. This module covers just a few of the many applications of electrostatics.

Name several real-world applications of the study of electrostatics.

The Van de Graaff Generator

Van de Graaff generators (or Van de Graaffs) are not only spectacular devices used to demonstrate high voltage due to static electricity—they are also used for serious research. The first was built by Robert Van de Graaff in 1931 (based on original suggestions by Lord Kelvin) for use in nuclear physics research. Figure 18.34 shows a schematic of a large research version. Van de Graaffs utilize both smooth and pointed surfaces, and conductors and insulators to generate large static charges and, hence, large voltages.

A very large excess charge can be deposited on the sphere, because it moves quickly to the outer surface. Practical limits arise because the large electric fields polarize and eventually ionize surrounding materials, creating free charges that neutralize excess charge or allow it to escape. Nevertheless, voltages of 15 million volts are well within practical limits.

Take-Home Experiment: Electrostatics and Humidity

Rub a comb through your hair and use it to lift pieces of paper. It may help to tear the pieces of paper rather than cut them neatly. Repeat the exercise in your bathroom after you have had a long shower and the air in the bathroom is moist. Is it easier to get electrostatic effects in dry or moist air? Why would torn paper be more attractive to the comb than cut paper? Explain your observations.

Xerography

Most copy machines use an electrostatic process called xerography—a word coined from the Greek words xerosfor dry and graphosfor writing. The heart of the process is shown in simplified form in Figure 18.35.

A selenium-coated aluminum drum is sprayed with positive charge from points on a device called a corotron. Selenium is a substance with an interesting property—it is a photoconductor. That is, selenium is an insulator whe

in the dark and a conductor when exposed to light.

In the first stage of the xerography process, the conducting aluminum drum is grounded so that a negative charge is induced under the thin layer of uniformly positively charged selenium. In the second stage, the surface of the drum is exposed to the image of whatever is to be copied. Where the image is light, the selenium becomes conducting, and the positive charge is neutralized. In dark areas, the positive charge remains, and so the image has been transferred to the drum.

The third stage takes a dry black powder, called toner, and sprays it with a negative charge so that it will be attracted to the positive regions of the drum. Next, a blank piece of paper is given a greater positive charge than on the drum so that it will pull the toner from the drum. Finally, the paper and electrostatically held toner are passed through heated pressure rollers, which melt and permanently adhere the toner within the fibers of the paper.

Laser Printers

Laser printers use the xerographic process to make high-quality images on paper, employing a laser to produce an image on the photoconducting drum as shown in Figure 18.36. In its most common application, the laser printer receives output from a computer, and it can achieve high-quality output because of the precision with which laser light can be controlled. Many laser printers do significant information processing, such as making sophisticated letters or fonts, and may contain a computer more powerful than the one giving them the raw data to be printed.

Ink Jet Printers and Electrostatic Painting

The ink jet printer, commonly used to print computer-generated text and graphics, also employs electrostatics. A nozzle makes a fine spray of tiny ink droplets, which are then given an electrostatic charge. (See Figure 18.37.)

Once charged, the droplets can be directed, using pairs of charged plates, with great precision to form letters and images on paper. Ink jet printers can produce color images by using a black jet and three other jets with primary colors, usually cyan, magenta, and yellow, much as a color television produces color. (This is more difficult with xerography, requiring multiple drums and toners.)

Electrostatic painting employs electrostatic charge to spray paint onto odd-shaped surfaces. Mutual repulsion of like charges causes the paint to fly away from its source. Surface tension forms drops, which are then attracted by unlike charges to the surface to be painted. Electrostatic painting can reach those hard-to-get at places, applying an even coat in a controlled manner. If the object is a conductor, the electric field is perpendicular to the surface, tending to bring the drops in perpendicularly. Corners and points on conductors will receive extra paint. Felt can similarly be applied.

Smoke Precipitators and Electrostatic Air Cleaning

Another important application of electrostatics is found in air cleaners, both large and small. The electrostatic part of the process places excess (usually positive) charge on smoke, dust, pollen, and other particles in the air and then passes the air through an oppositely charged grid that attracts and retains the charged particles. (See Figure 18.38.)

Large electrostatic precipitators are used industrially to remove over  of the particles from stack gas emissions associated with the burning of coal and oil. Home precipitators, often in conjunction with the home heating and air conditioning system, are very effective in removing polluting particles, irritants, and allergens.

Problem-Solving Strategies for Electrostatics

1. Examine the situation to determine if static electricity is involved. This may concern separated stationary charges, the forces among them, and the electric fields they create.   
2. Identify the system of interest. This includes noting the number, locations, and types of charges involved.   
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful. Determine whether the Coulomb force is to be considered directly—if so, it may be useful to draw a free-body diagram, using electric field lines.   
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns). It is important to distinguish the Coulomb force  from the electric field  , for example.   
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown) or draw the field lines as requested.   
6. Examine the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense? Are units correct and the numbers involved reasonable?

Integrated Concepts

The Integrated Concepts exercises for this module involve concepts such as electric charges, electric fields, and several other topics. Physics is most interesting when applied to general situations involving more than a narrow set of physical principles. The electric field exerts force on charges, for example, and hence the relevance of Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion. The following topics are involved in some or all of the problems labeled “Integrated Concepts”:

Kinematics   
Two-Dimensional Kinematics   
Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion   
Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation   
Statics and Torque   
Fluid Statics

The following worked example illustrates how this strategy is applied to an Integrated Concept problem:

EXAMPLE 18.5

Acceleration of a Charged Drop of Gasoline

If steps are not taken to ground a gasoline pump, static electricity can be placed on gasoline when filling your car’s tank. Suppose a tiny drop of gasoline has a mass of  and is given a positive charge of  . (a) Find the weight of the drop. (b) Calculate the electric force on the drop if there is an upward electric field of strength  due to other static electricity in the vicinity. (c) Calculate the drop’s acceleration.

Strategy

To solve an integrated concept problem, we must first identify the physical principles involved and identify the chapters in which they are found. Part (a) of this example asks for weight. This is a topic of dynamics and is defined in Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion. Part (b) deals with electric force on a charge, a topic of Electric Charge and Electric Field. Part (c) asks for acceleration, knowing forces and mass. These are part of Newton’s laws, also found in Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion.

The following solutions to each part of the example illustrate how the specific problem-solving strategies are applied. These involve identifying knowns and unknowns, checking to see if the answer is reasonable, and so on.

Solution for (a)

Weight is mass times the acceleration due to gravity, as first expressed in

Entering the given mass and the average acceleration due to gravity yields

Discussion for (a)

This is a small weight, consistent with the small mass of the drop.

Solution for (b)

The force an electric field exerts on a charge is given by rearranging the following equation:

Here we are given the charge  is twice the fundamental unit of charge) and the electric field strength, and so the electric force is found to be

Discussion for (b)

While this is a small force, it is greater than the weight of the drop.

Solution for (c)

The acceleration can be found using Newton’s second law, provided we can identify all of the external forces acting on the drop. We assume only the drop’s weight and the electric force are significant. Since the drop has a positive charge and the electric field is given to be upward, the electric force is upward. We thus have a one-dimensional (vertical direction) problem, and we can state Newton’s second law as

where  . Entering this and the known values into the expression for Newton’s second law yields

Discussion for (c)

This is an upward acceleration great enough to carry the drop to places where you might not wish to have gasoline.

This worked example illustrates how to apply problem-solving strategies to situations that include topics in different chapters. The first step is to identify the physical principles involved in the problem. The second step is to solve for the unknown using familiar problem-solving strategies. These are found throughout the text, and many worked examples show how to use them for single topics. In this integrated concepts example, you can see how to apply them across several topics. You will find these techniques useful in applications of physics outside a physics course, such as in your profession, in other science disciplines, and in everyday life. The following problems will build your skills in the broad application of physical principles.

Unreasonable Results

The Unreasonable Results exercises for this module have results that are unreasonable because some premise is unreasonable or because certain of the premises are inconsistent with one another. Physical principles applied correctly then produce unreasonable results. The purpose of these problems is to give practice in assessing whether nature is being accurately described, and if it is not to trace the source of difficulty.

Problem-Solving Strategy

To determine if an answer is reasonable, and to determine the cause if it is not, do the following.

1. Solve the problem using strategies as outlined above. Use the format followed in the worked examples in the text to solve the problem as usual.   
2. Check to see if the answer is reasonable. Is it too large or too small, or does it have the wrong sign, improper units, and so on?   
3. If the answer is unreasonable, look for what specifically could cause the identified difficulty. Usually, the manner in which the answer is unreasonable is an indication of the difficulty. For example, an extremely large Coulomb force could be due to the assumption of an excessively large separated charge.

Glossary

conductor a material that allows electrons to move separately from their atomic orbits   
conductor an object with properties that allow charges to move about freely within it   
Coulomb force another term for the electrostatic force   
Coulomb interaction the interaction between two charged particles generated by the Coulomb forces they exert on one another   
Coulomb’s law the mathematical equation calculating the electrostatic force vector between two charged particles   
dipole a molecule’s lack of symmetrical charge distribution, causing one side to be more positive and another to be more negative   
electric charge a physical property of an object that causes it to be attracted toward or repelled from another charged object; each charged object generates and is influenced by a force called an electromagnetic force   
electric field a three-dimensional map of the electric force extended out into space from a point charge   
electric field lines a series of lines drawn from a point charge representing the magnitude and direction of force exerted by that charge   
electromagnetic force one of the four fundamental forces of nature; the electromagnetic force consists of static electricity, moving electricity and magnetism   
electron a particle orbiting the nucleus of an atom and carrying the smallest unit of negative charge   
electrostatic equilibrium an electrostatically balanced state in which all free electrical charges have stopped moving about   
electrostatic force the amount and direction of attraction or repulsion between two charged bodies   
electrostatic precipitators filters that apply charges to particles in the air, then attract those charges to a filter, removing them from the airstream   
electrostatic repulsion the phenomenon of two objects with like charges repelling each other   
electrostatics the study of electric forces that are static or slow-moving   
Faraday cage a metal shield which prevents electric charge from penetrating its surface   
field a map of the amount and direction of a force acting on other objects, extending out into space   
free charge an electrical charge (either positive or negative) which can move about separately from its base molecule   
free electron an electron that is free to move away from its atomic orbit   
grounded connected to the ground with a conductor, so that charge flows freely to and from the Earth to the grounded object   
grounded when a conductor is connected to the Earth, allowing charge to freely flow to and from Earth’s unlimited reservoir   
induction the process by which an electrically charged object brought near a neutral object creates a charge in that object   
ink-jet printer small ink droplets sprayed with an electric charge are controlled by electrostatic plates to create images on paper   
insulator a material that holds electrons securely within their atomic orbits   
ionosphere a layer of charged particles located around  above the surface of Earth, which is responsible for a range of phenomena including the electric field surrounding Earth   
laser printer uses a laser to create a photoconductive image on a drum, which attracts dry ink particles that are then rolled onto a sheet of paper to print a high-quality copy of the image   
law of conservation of charge states that whenever a charge is created, an equal amount of charge with the opposite sign is created simultaneously   
photoconductor a substance that is an insulator until it is exposed to light, when it becomes a conductor   
point charge A charged particle, designated  , generating an electric field   
polar molecule a molecule with an asymmetrical distribution of positive and negative charge   
polarization slight shifting of positive and negative charges to opposite sides of an atom or molecule   
polarized a state in which the positive and negative charges within an object have collected in separate locations   
proton a particle in the nucleus of an atom and carrying a positive charge equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to the amount of negative charge carried by an electron   
screening the dilution or blocking of an electrostatic force on a charged object by the presence of other charges nearby   
static electricity a buildup of electric charge on the surface of an object   
test charge A particle (designated ) with either a positive or negative charge set down within an electric field generated by a point charge   
Van de Graaff generator a machine that produces a large amount of excess charge, used for experiments with high voltage   
vector a quantity with both magnitude and direction

vector addition mathematical combination of two or more vectors, including their magnitudes, directions, and positions

xerography a dry copying process based on electrostatics

Section Summary

18.1 Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge

• There are only two types of charge, which we call positive and negative.   
• Like charges repel, unlike charges attract, and the force between charges decreases with the square of the distance.   
• The vast majority of positive charge in nature is carried by protons, while the vast majority of negative charge is carried by electrons.   
• The electric charge of one electron is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to the charge of one proton.   
• An ion is an atom or molecule that has nonzero total charge due to having unequal numbers of electrons and protons.   
• The SI unit for charge is the coulomb (C), with protons and electrons having charges of opposite sign but equal magnitude; the magnitude of this basic charge  is lqe| = 1.60 × 10-19 C.   
Whenever charge is created or destroyed, equal amounts of positive and negative are involved.   
• Most often, existing charges are separated from neutral objects to obtain some net charge.   
• Both positive and negative charges exist in neutral objects and can be separated by rubbing one object with another. For macroscopic objects, negatively charged means an excess of electrons and positively charged means a depletion of electrons.   
• The law of conservation of charge ensures that whenever a charge is created, an equal charge of the opposite sign is created at the same time.

18.2 Conductors and Insulators

• Polarization is the separation of positive and negative charges in a neutral object.   
• A conductor is a substance that allows charge to flow freely through its atomic structure.   
• An insulator holds charge within its atomic structure.   
• Objects with like charges repel each other, while those with unlike charges attract each other.   
• A conducting object is said to be grounded if it is connected to the Earth through a conductor. Grounding allows transfer of charge to and from the earth’s large reservoir.   
• Objects can be charged by contact with another charged object and obtain the same sign charge.   
• If an object is temporarily grounded, it can be charged by induction, and obtains the opposite sign charge.   
• Polarized objects have their positive and negative charges concentrated in different areas, giving them a non-symmetrical charge. Polar molecules have an inherent separation of charge.

18.3 Coulomb’s Law

• Frenchman Charles Coulomb was the first to publish the mathematical equation that describes the electrostatic force between two objects.   
• Coulomb’s law gives the magnitude of the force between point charges. It is  where  and  are two point charges separated by a distance  , and    
• This Coulomb force is extremely basic, since most charges are due to point-like particles. It is responsible for all electrostatic effects and underlies most macroscopic forces.   
• The Coulomb force is extraordinarily strong compared with the gravitational force, another basic force—but unlike gravitational force it can cancel, since it can be either attractive or repulsive.   
• The electrostatic force between two subatomic particles is far greater than the gravitational force between the same two particles.

18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited

• The electrostatic force field surrounding a charged object extends out into space in all directions.   
• The electrostatic force exerted by a point charge on a test charge at a distance  depends on the charge of both charges, as well as the distance between the two. The electric field  is defined to be  where  is the Coulomb or electrostatic force exerted on a small positive test charge  . has

units of  .

• The magnitude of the electric field created by a point charge  is  where  is the distance from  . The electric field is a vector and fields due to multiple charges add like vectors.

18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

• Drawings of electric field lines are useful visual tools. The properties of electric field lines for any charge distribution are that:   
• Field lines must begin on positive charges and terminate on negative charges, or at infinity in the hypothetical case of isolated charges. The number of field lines leaving a positive charge or entering a negative charge is proportional to the magnitude of the charge.   
• The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness of the field lines—more precisely, it is proportional to the number of lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines.   
• The direction of the electric field is tangent to the field line at any point in space. Field lines can never cross.

18.6 Electric Forces in Biology

• Many molecules in living organisms, such as DNA, carry a charge.   
• An uneven distribution of the positive and negative charges within a polar molecule produces a dipole.   
• The effect of a Coulomb field generated by a charged object may be reduced or blocked by other nearby charged objects.

Conceptual Questions

18.1 Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge

1. There are very large numbers of charged particles in most objects. Why, then, don’t most objects exhibit static electricity?   
2. Why do most objects tend to contain nearly equal numbers of positive and negative charges?

Biological systems contain water, and because water molecules are polar, they have a strong effect on other molecules in living systems.

18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium

• A conductor allows free charges to move about within it.   
• The electrical forces around a conductor will cause free charges to move around inside the conductor until static equilibrium is reached.   
• Any excess charge will collect along the surface of a conductor.   
• Conductors with sharp corners or points will collect more charge at those points.   
• A lightning rod is a conductor with sharply pointed ends that collect excess charge on the building caused by an electrical storm and allow it to dissipate back into the air.   
• Electrical storms result when the electrical field of Earth’s surface in certain locations becomes more strongly charged, due to changes in the insulating effect of the air.   
• A Faraday cage acts like a shield around an object, preventing electric charge from penetrating inside.

18.8 Applications of Electrostatics

• Electrostatics is the study of electric fields in static equilibrium.   
• In addition to research using equipment such as a Van de Graaff generator, many practical applications of electrostatics exist, including photocopiers, laser printers, ink-jet printers and electrostatic air filters.

18.2 Conductors and Insulators

3. An eccentric inventor attempts to levitate by first placing a large negative charge on himself and then putting a large positive charge on the ceiling of his workshop. Instead, while attempting to place a large negative charge on himself, his clothes fly off. Explain.   
4. If you have charged an electroscope by contact with a positively charged object, describe how you could use it to determine the charge of other objects. Specifically, what would the leaves of the electroscope do if other charged objects were brought near its knob?   
5. When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, it becomes positive and the silk becomes negative—yet both attract dust. Does the dust have a third type of charge that is attracted to both positive and negative? Explain.   
6. Why does a car always attract dust right after it is polished? (Note that car wax and car tires are insulators.)   
7. Describe how a positively charged object can be used to give another object a negative charge. What is the name of this process?   
8. What is grounding? What effect does it have on a charged conductor? On a charged insulator?

18.3 Coulomb’s Law

9. Figure 18.39 shows the charge distribution in a water molecule, which is called a polar molecule because it has an inherent separation of charge. Given water’s polar character, explain what effect humidity has on removing excess charge from objects.

10. Using Figure 18.39, explain, in terms of Coulomb’s law, why a polar molecule (such as in Figure 18.39) is attracted by both positive and negative charges.   
11. Given the polar character of water molecules, explain how ions in the air form nucleation centers for rain droplets.

18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited

12. Why must the test charge  in the definition of the electric field be vanishingly small?

13. Are the direction and magnitude of the Coulomb force unique at a given point in space? What about the electric field?

18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

14. Compare and contrast the Coulomb force field and the electric field. To do this, make a list of five properties for the Coulomb force field analogous to the five properties listed for electric field lines. Compare each item in your list of Coulomb force field properties with those of the electric field—are they the same or different? (For example, electric field lines cannot cross. Is the same true for Coulomb field lines?)

15. Figure 18.40 shows an electric field extending over three regions, labeled I, II, and III. Answer the following questions. (a) Are there any isolated charges? If so, in what region and what are their signs? (b) Where is the field strongest? (c) Where is it weakest? (d) Where is the field the most uniform?

18.6 Electric Forces in Biology

16. A cell membrane is a thin layer enveloping a cell. The thickness of the membrane is much less than the size of the cell. In a static situation the membrane has a charge distribution of  on its inner surface and  on its outer surface. Draw a diagram of the cell and the surrounding cell membrane. Include on this diagram the charge distribution and the corresponding electric field. Is there any electric field inside the cell? Is there any electric field outside the cell?

18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium

17. Is the object in Figure 18.41 a conductor or an insulator? Justify your answer.

18. If the electric field lines in the figure above were perpendicular to the object, would it necessarily be a conductor? Explain.

19. The discussion of the electric field between two parallel conducting plates, in this module states that edge effects are less important if the plates are close together. What does close mean? That is, is the actual plate separation crucial, or is the ratio of plate separation to plate area crucial?

20. Would the self-created electric field at the end of a pointed conductor, such as a lightning rod, remove positive or negative charge from the conductor? Would the same sign charge be removed from a neutral pointed conductor by the application of a similar externally created electric field? (The answers to both questions have implications for charge transfer utilizing points.)

21. Why is a golfer with a metal club over her shoulder vulnerable to lightning in an open fairway? Would she be any safer under a tree?

22. Can the belt of a Van de Graaff accelerator be a conductor? Explain.

23. Are you relatively safe from lightning inside an automobile? Give two reasons.

24. Discuss pros and cons of a lightning rod being grounded versus simply being attached to a building.

25. Using the symmetry of the arrangement, show that the net Coulomb force on the charge  at the center of the square below (Figure 18.42) is zero if the charges on the four corners are exactly equal.

26. (a) Using the symmetry of the arrangement, show that the electric field at the center of the square in Figure 18.42 is zero if the charges on the four corners are exactly equal. (b) Show that this is also true for any combination of charges in which  and    
27. (a) What is the direction of the total Coulomb force on  in Figure 18.42 if  is negative,  and both are negative, and  and both are positive? (b) What is the direction of the electric field at the center of the square in this situation?   
28. Considering Figure 18.42, suppose that  and  . First show that  is in static equilibrium. (You may neglect the gravitational force.) Then discuss whether the equilibrium is stable or unstable, noting that this may depend on the signs of the charges and the direction of displacement of  from the center of the square.   
29. If  in Figure 18.42, under what conditions will there be no net Coulomb force on ?   
30. In regions of low humidity, one develops a special “grip” when opening car doors, or touching metal door knobs. This involves placing as much of the hand on the device as possible, not just the ends of one’s fingers. Discuss the induced charge and explain why this is done.   
31. Tollbooth stations on roadways and bridges usually have a piece of wire stuck in the pavement before them that will touch a car as it approaches. Why is this done?   
32. Suppose a person carries an excess charge. To maintain their charged status can they be standing on ground wearing just any pair of shoes? How would you discharge them? What are the consequences if they simply walk away?

Problems & Exercises

18.1 Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge

1. Common static electricity involves charges ranging from nanocoulombs to microcoulombs. (a) How many electrons are needed to form a charge of  (b) How many electrons must be removed from a neutral object to leave a net charge of    
2. If  electrons move through a pocket calculator during a full day’s operation, how many coulombs of charge moved through it?   
3. To start a car engine, the car battery moves  electrons through the starter motor. How many coulombs of charge were moved?   
4. A certain lightning bolt moves  of charge. How many fundamental units of charge  is this?

18.2 Conductors and Insulators

5. Suppose a speck of dust in an electrostatic precipitator has  protons in it and has a net charge of  (a very large charge for a small speck). How many electrons does it have?   
6. An amoeba has  protons and a net charge of 0.300 pC. (a) How many fewer electrons are there than protons? (b) If you paired them up, what fraction of the protons would have no electrons?   
7. A  ball of copper has a net charge of  . What fraction of the copper’s electrons has been removed? (Each copper atom has 29 protons, and copper has an atomic mass of 63.5.)   
8. What net charge would you place on a  piece of sulfur if you put an extra electron on 1 in  of its atoms? (Sulfur has an atomic mass of 32.1.)   
9. How many coulombs of positive charge are there in  of plutonium, given its atomic mass is 244 and that each plutonium atom has 94 protons?

18.3 Coulomb’s Law

10. What is the repulsive force between two pith balls that are 8.00 cm apart and have equal charges of    
11. (a) How strong is the attractive force between a glass rod with a  charge and a silk cloth with a  charge, which are  apart, using the approximation that they act like point charges? (b) Discuss how the answer to this problem might be affected if the charges are distributed over some area and do not act like point charges.   
12. Two point charges exert a 5.00 N force on each other. What will the force become if the distance between them is increased by a factor of three?   
13. Two point charges are brought closer together, increasing the force between them by a factor of 25. By what factor was their separation decreased?   
14. How far apart must two point charges of 75.0 nC (typical of static electricity) be to have a force of 1.00 N between them?   
15. If two equal charges each of 1 C each are separated in air by a distance of  , what is the magnitude of the force acting between them? You will see that even at a distance as large as  , the repulsive force is substantial because 1 C is a very significant amount of charge.   
16. A test charge of  is placed halfway between a charge of  and another of  separated by  . (a) What is the magnitude of the force on the test charge? (b) What is the direction of this force (away from or toward the  charge)?   
17. Bare free charges do not remain stationary when close together. To illustrate this, calculate the acceleration of two isolated protons separated by  (a typical distance between gas atoms). Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategy for electrostatics.   
18. (a) By what factor must you change the distance between two point charges to change the force between them by a factor of 10? (b) Explain how the distance can either increase or decrease by this factor and still cause a factor of 10 change in the force.   
19. Suppose you have a total charge  that you can split in any manner. Once split, the separation distance is fixed. How do you split the charge to achieve the greatest force?   
20. (a) Common transparent tape becomes charged when pulled from a dispenser. If one piece is placed above another, the repulsive force can be great enough to support the top piece’s weight. Assuming equal point charges (only an approximation), calculate the magnitude of the charge if electrostatic force is great enough to support the weight of a  piece of tape held  above another. (b) Discuss whether the magnitude of this charge is consistent with what is typical of static electricity.   
21. (a) Find the ratio of the electrostatic to gravitational force between two electrons. (b) What is this ratio for two protons? (c) Why is the ratio different for electrons and protons?   
22. At what distance is the electrostatic force between two protons equal to the weight of one proton?   
23. A certain five cent coin contains  of nickel. What fraction of the nickel atoms’ electrons, removed and placed  above it, would support the weight of this coin? The atomic mass of nickel is 58.7, and each nickel atom contains 28 electrons and 28 protons.   
24. (a) Two point charges totaling  exert a repulsive force of 0.150 N on one another when separated by  . What is the charge on each? (b) What is the charge on each if the force is attractive?   
25. Point charges of  and  are placed  apart. (a) Where can a third charge be placed so that the net force on it is zero? (b) What if both charges are positive?   
26. Two point charges  and  are  apart, and their total charge is  . (a) If the force of repulsion between them is 0.075N, what are magnitudes of the two charges? (b) If one charge attracts the other with a force of 0.525N, what are the magnitudes of the two charges? Note that you may need to solve a quadratic equation to reach your answer.

18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited

27. What is the magnitude and direction of an electric field that exerts a  upward force on  charge?   
28. What is the magnitude and direction of the force exerted on a  charge by a  electric field that points due east?   
29. Calculate the magnitude of the electric field 2.00 m from a point charge of  (such as found on the terminal of a Van de Graaff).   
30. (a) What magnitude point charge creates a 10,000  electric field at a distance of  (b) How large is the field at    
31. Calculate the initial (from rest) acceleration of a proton in a  electric field (such as created by a research Van de Graaff). Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the ProblemSolving Strategy for electrostatics.

32. (a) Find the magnitude and direction of an electric field that exerts a  westward force on an electron. (b) What magnitude and direction force does this field exert on a proton?

18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

33. (a) Sketch the electric field lines near a point charge  . (b) Do the same for a point charge  .   
34. Sketch the electric field lines a long distance from the charge distributions shown in Figure 18.23 (a) and (b)   
35. Figure 18.43 shows the electric field lines near two charges  and  . What is the ratio of their magnitudes? (b) Sketch the electric field lines a long distance from the charges shown in the figure.

36. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of two opposite charges, where the negative charge is three times greater in magnitude than the positive. (See Figure 18.43 for a similar situation).

18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium

37. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the conductor in Figure 18.44 given the field was originally uniform and parallel to the object’s long axis. Is the resulting field small near the long side of the object?

40. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the charged insulator in Figure 18.47 noting its nonuniform charge distribution.

38. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the conductor in Figure 18.45 given the field was originally uniform and parallel to the object’s long axis. Is the resulting field small near the long side of the object?

39. Sketch the electric field between the two conducting plates shown in Figure 18.46, given the top plate is positive and an equal amount of negative charge is on the bottom plate. Be certain to indicate the distribution of charge on the plates.

41. What is the force on the charge located at  in Figure 18.48(a) given that 

42. (a) Find the total electric field at  in Figure 18.48(b). (b) If the charges are allowed to move and eventually be brought to rest by friction, what will the final charge configuration be? (That is, will there be a single charge, double charge, etc., and what will its value(s) be?)

43. (a) Find the electric field at  in Figure 18.48(a), given that  . (b) At what position between 3.00 and 8.00 cm is the total electric field the same as that for  alone? (c) Can the electric field be zero anywhere between 0.00 and  (d) At very large positive or negative values of  ,the electric field approaches zero in both (a) and (b). In which does it most rapidly approach zero and why? (e) At what position to the right of  is the total electric field zero, other than at infinity? (Hint: A graphing calculator can yield considerable insight in this problem.)

44. (a) Find the total Coulomb force on a charge of  located at  in Figure 18.48 (b), given that  . (b) Find the  -position at which the electric field is zero in Figure 18.48 (b).

45. Using the symmetry of the arrangement, determine the direction of the force on  in the figure below, given that  and  . (b) Calculate the magnitude of the force on the charge  , given that the square is  on a side and  .

46. (a) Using the symmetry of the arrangement, determine the direction of the electric field at the center of the square in Figure 18.49, given that  and  (b) Calculate the magnitude of the electric field at the location of  , given that the square is  on a side.

47. Find the electric field at the location of  in Figure 18.49 given that   , and the square is  on a side.

48. Find the total Coulomb force on the charge  in Figure 18.49, given that  ,  ,   and  . The square is  on a side.

49. (a) Find the electric field at the location of  in Figure 18.50, given that  and  (b) What is the force on  , given that 

50. (a) Find the electric field at the center of the triangular configuration of charges in Figure 18.50, given that  ,  , and  . (b) Is there any combination of charges, other than  , that will produce a zero strength electric field at the center of the triangular configuration?

18.8 Applications of Electrostatics

51. (a) What is the electric field  from the center of the terminal of a Van de Graaff with a  charge, noting that the field is equivalent to that of a point charge at the center of the terminal? (b) At this distance, what force does the field exert on a  charge on the Van de Graaff’s belt?   
52. (a) What is the direction and magnitude of an electric field that supports the weight of a free electron near the surface of Earth? (b) Discuss what the small value for this field implies regarding the relative strength of the gravitational and electrostatic forces.

53. A simple and common technique for accelerating electrons is shown in Figure 18.51, where there is a uniform electric field between two plates. Electrons are released, usually from a hot filament, near the negative plate, and there is a small hole in the positive plate that allows the electrons to continue moving. (a) Calculate the acceleration of the electron if the field strength is  (b) Explain why the electron will not be pulled back to the positive plate once it moves through the hole.

54. Earth has a net charge that produces an electric field of approximately  downward at its surface. (a) What is the magnitude and sign of the excess charge, noting the electric field of a conducting sphere is equivalent to a point charge at its center? (b) What acceleration will the field produce on a free electron near Earth’s surface? (c) What mass object with a single extra electron will have its weight supported by this field?

55. Point charges of  and  are placed  apart. (a) At what point along the line between them is the electric field zero? (b) What is the electric field halfway between them?

56. What can you say about two charges  and  , if the electric field one-fourth of the way from  to  is zero?

57. Integrated Concepts

Calculate the angular velocity of an electron orbiting a proton in the hydrogen atom, given the radius of the orbit is  . You may assume that the proton is stationary and the centripetal force is supplied by Coulomb attraction.

58. Integrated Concepts An electron has an initial velocity of  in a uniform  strength electric field. The field accelerates the electron in the direction opposite to its initial velocity. (a) What is the direction of the electric field? (b) How far does the electron travel before coming to rest? (c) How long does it take the electron to come to rest? (d) What is the electron’s velocity when it returns to its starting point?

59. Integrated Concepts The practical limit to an electric field in air is about  . Above this strength, sparking takes place because air begins to ionize and charges flow, reducing the field. (a) Calculate the distance a free proton must travel in this field to reach  of the speed of light, starting from rest. (b) Is this practical in air, or must it occur in a vacuum?

60. Integrated Concepts A  charged insulating ball hangs on a 30.0 cm long string in a uniform horizontal electric field as shown in Figure 18.52. Given the charge on the ball is  , find the strength of the field.

61. Integrated Concepts

Figure 18.53 shows an electron passing between two charged metal plates that create an  vertical electric field perpendicular to the electron’s original horizontal velocity. (These can be used to change the electron’s direction, such as in an oscilloscope.) The initial speed of the electron is  , and the horizontal distance it travels in the uniform field is 4.00 cm. (a) What is its vertical deflection? (b) What is the vertical component of its final velocity? (c) At what angle does it exit? Neglect any edge effects.

62. Integrated Concepts

The classic Millikan oil drop experiment was the first to obtain an accurate measurement of the charge on an electron. In it, oil drops were suspended against the gravitational force by a vertical electric field. (See Figure 18.54.) Given the oil drop to be  in radius and have a density of  : (a) Find the weight of the drop. (b) If the drop has a single excess electron, find the electric field strength needed to balance its weight.

63. Integrated Concepts

(a) In Figure 18.55, four equal charges  lie on the corners of a square. A fifth charge  is on a mass  directly above the center of the square, at a height equal to the length  of one side of the square. Determine the magnitude of  in terms of  , and  , if the Coulomb force is to equal the weight of  . (b) Is this equilibrium stable or unstable? Discuss.

64. Unreasonable Results

(a) Calculate the electric field strength near a 10.0 cm diameter conducting sphere that has 1.00 C of excess charge on it. (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which assumptions are responsible?

65. Unreasonable Results (a) Two 0.500 g raindrops in a thunderhead are  apart when they each acquire  charges. Find their acceleration. (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which premise or assumption is responsible?

66. Unreasonable Results A wrecking yard inventor wants to pick up cars by charging a  diameter ball and inducing an equal and opposite charge on the car. If a car has  mass and the ball is to be able to lift it from a distance of  (a) What minimum charge must be used? (b) What is the electric field near the surface of the ball? (c) Why are these results unreasonable? (d) Which premise or assumption is responsible?

67. Construct Your Own Problem Consider two insulating balls with evenly distributed equal and opposite charges on their surfaces, held with a certain distance between the centers of the balls. Construct a problem in which you calculate the electric field (magnitude and direction) due to the balls at various points along a line running through the centers of the balls and extending to infinity on either side. Choose interesting points and comment on the meaning of the field at those points. For example, at what points might the field be just that due to one ball and where does the field become negligibly small? Among the things to be considered are the magnitudes of the charges and the distance between the centers of the balls. Your instructor may wish for you to consider the electric field off axis or for a more complex array of charges, such as those in a water molecule.

68. Construct Your Own Problem Consider identical spherical conducting space ships in deep space where gravitational fields from other bodies are negligible compared to the gravitational attraction between the ships. Construct a problem in which you place identical excess charges on the space ships to exactly counter their gravitational attraction. Calculate the amount of excess charge needed. Examine whether that charge depends on the distance between the centers of the ships, the masses of the ships, or any other factors. Discuss whether this would be an easy, difficult, or even impossible thing to do in practice.

Critical Thinking A frictionless circular track with a diameter of  has two spheres of  each anchored very near it. The track is oriented with a diameter along the  -axis. The anchored spheres are just outside the track. One of the anchored spheres is just left of the origin at a distance of  from it, and the other is on the  -axis just right of the track at a distance of  past  . Each sphere carries a charge of  . (Note: The slight distance from the track is so the particles cannot collide, and does not enter into the calculations for three significant figures.) (a) A third sphere has a mass of  and carries a charge of  . It is free to move on the track. It is initially placed an equal length from the two anchored spheres at . What is the total force on the third sphere? (Be certain to include gravity between the spheres.) (b) Will the third sphere move? (c) Label the first two spheres A and B, and the movable sphere C. Now start sphere C at . What are the forces on sphere C? (d) Will sphere C now move? (e) If it does, where will it stop moving and reverse course? If it does not move, you may skip this part. (f) How many equilibrium points are there on the track at which the movable sphere will remain stationary? Where are they?