5.4 Bulk Transport

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

• Describe endocytosis, including phagocytosis, pinocytosis, and receptor-mediated endocytosis • Understand the process of exocytosis

In addition to moving small ions and molecules through the membrane, cells also need to remove and take in larger molecules and particles (see Table 5.2 for examples). Some cells are even capable of engulfing entire unicellular microorganisms. You might have correctly hypothesized that when a cell uptakes and releases large particles, it requires energy. A large particle, however, cannot pass through the membrane, even with energy that the cell supplies.

Endocytosis

Endocytosis is a type of active transport that moves particles, such as large molecules, parts of cells, and even whole cells, into a cell. There are different endocytosis variations, but all share a common characteristic: the cell's plasma membrane invaginates, forming a pocket around the target particle. The pocket pinches off, resulting in the particle containing itself in a newly created intracellular vesicle formed from the plasma membrane.

Phagocytosis

Phagocytosis (the condition of “cell eating”) is the process by which a cell takes in large particles, such as other cells or relatively large particles. For example, when microorganisms invade the human body, a type of white blood cell, a neutrophil, will remove the invaders through this process, surrounding and engulfing the microorganism, which the neutrophil then destroys (Figure 5.20).

Phagocytosis

In preparation for phagocytosis, a portion of the plasma membrane's inward-facing surface becomes coated with the protein clathrin, which stabilizes this membrane's section. The membrane's coated portion then extends from the cell's body and surrounds the particle, eventually enclosing it. Once the vesicle containing the particle is enclosed within the cell, the clathrin disengages from the membrane and the vesicle merges with a lysosome for breaking down the material in the newly formed compartment (endosome). When accessible nutrients from the vesicular contents' degradation have been extracted, the newly formed endosome merges with the plasma membrane and releases its contents into the extracellular fluid. The endosomal membrane again becomes part of the plasma membrane.

Pinocytosis

A variation of endocytosis is pinocytosis. This literally means “cell drinking”. Discovered by Warren Lewis in 1929, this American embryologist and cell biologist described a process whereby he assumed that the cell was purposefully taking in extracellular fluid. In reality, this is a process that takes in molecules, including water, which the cell needs from the extracellular fluid. Pinocytosis results in a much smaller vesicle than does phagocytosis, and the vesicle does not need to merge with a lysosome (Figure 5.21).

A variation of pinocytosis is potocytosis. This process uses a coating protein, caveolin, on the plasma membrane's cytoplasmic side, which performs a similar function to clathrin. The cavities in the plasma membrane that form the vacuoles have membrane receptors and lipid rafts in addition to caveolin. The vacuoles or vesicles formed in caveolae (singular caveola) are smaller than those in pinocytosis. Potocytosis brings small molecules into the cell and transports them through the cell for their release on the other side, a process we call transcytosis.

Receptor-mediated Endocytosis

A targeted variation of endocytosis employs receptor proteins in the plasma membrane that have a specific binding affinity for certain substances (Figure 5.22).

Receptor-mediated endocytosis

In receptor-mediated endocytosis, as in phagocytosis, clathrin attaches to the plasma membrane's cytoplasmic side. If a compound's uptake is dependent on receptor-mediated endocytosis and the process is ineffective, the material will not be removed from the tissue fluids or blood. Instead, it will stay in those fluids and increase in concentration. The failure of receptor-mediated endocytosis causes some human diseases. For example, receptor mediated endocytosis removes low density lipoprotein or LDL (or "bad" cholesterol) from the blood. In the human genetic disease familial hypercholesterolemia, the LDL receptors are defective or missing entirely. People with this condition have life-threatening levels of cholesterol in their blood, because their cells cannot clear LDL particles.

Although receptor-mediated endocytosis is designed to bring specific substances that are normally in the extracellular fluid into the cell, other substances may gain entry into the cell at the same site. Flu viruses, diphtheria, and cholera toxin all have sites that cross-react with normal receptor-binding sites and gain entry into cells.

LINK TO LEARNING

See receptor-mediated endocytosis in action, and click on different parts (http://openstax.org/l/endocytosis) for a focused animation.

Exocytosis

The reverse process of moving material into a cell is the process of exocytosis. Exocytosis is the opposite of the processes we discussed above in that its purpose is to expel material from the cell into the extracellular fluid. Waste material is enveloped in a membrane and fuses with the plasma membrane's interior. This fusion opens the membranous envelope on the cell's exterior, and the waste material expels into the extracellular space (Figure 5.23). Other examples of cells releasing molecules via exocytosis include extracellular matrix protein secretion and neurotransmitter secretion into the synaptic cleft by synaptic

vesicles.

Methods of Transport, Energy Requirements, and Types of Transported Material

KEY TERMS

active transport method of transporting material that requires energy   
amphiphilic molecule possessing a polar or charged area and a nonpolar or uncharged area capable of interacting with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic environments   
antiporter transporter that carries two ions or small molecules in different directions   
aquaporin channel protein that allows water through the membrane at a very high rate   
carrier protein membrane protein that moves a substance across the plasma membrane by changing its own shape   
caveolin protein that coats the plasma membrane's cytoplasmic side and participates in the liquid uptake process by potocytosis   
channel protein membrane protein that allows a substance to pass through its hollow core across the plasma membrane   
clathrin protein that coats the plasma membrane's inwardfacing surface and assists in forming specialized structures, like coated pits, for phagocytosis   
concentration gradient area of high concentration adjacent to an area of low concentration   
diffusion passive transport process of low-molecular weight material according to its concentration gradient   
electrochemical gradient a combined electrical and chemical force that produces a gradient   
electrogenic pump pump that creates a charge imbalance   
endocytosis type of active transport that moves substances, including fluids and particles, into a cell   
exocytosis process of passing bulk material out of a cell   
facilitated transport process by which material moves down a concentration gradient (from high to low concentration) using integral membrane proteins   
fluid mosaic model describes the plasma membrane's structure as a mosaic of components including phospholipids, cholesterol, proteins, glycoproteins, and glycolipids (sugar chains attached to proteins or lipids, respectively), resulting in a fluid character (fluidity)   
glycolipid combination of carbohydrates and lipids   
glycoprotein combination of carbohydrates and proteins   
hydrophilic molecule with the ability to bond with water; “water-loving”   
hydrophobic molecule that does not have the ability to bond with water; “water-hating”   
hypertonic situation in which extracellular fluid has a higher osmolarity than the fluid inside the cell, resulting in water moving out of the cell   
hypotonic situation in which extracellular fluid has a lower osmolarity than the fluid inside the cell, resulting in water moving into the cell   
integral protein protein integrated into the membrane lipids' hydrocarbon chains and often spans the membrane   
isotonic situation in which the extracellular fluid has the same osmolarity as the fluid inside the cell, resulting in no net water movement into or out of the cell   
osmolarity total amount of substances dissolved in a specific amount of solution   
osmosis transport of water through a semipermeable membrane according to the water's concentration gradient across the membrane that results from the presence of solute that cannot pass through the membrane   
passive transport method of transporting material through a membrane that does not require energy   
peripheral protein protein at the plasma membrane's surface either on its exterior or interior side   
pinocytosis a variation of endocytosis that imports macromolecules that the cell needs from the extracellular fluid   
plasmolysis detaching the cell membrane from the cell wall and constricting the cell membrane when a plant cell is in a hypertonic solution   
potocytosis variation of pinocytosis that uses a different coating protein (caveolin) on the plasma membrane's cytoplasmic side   
primary active transport active transport that moves ions or small molecules across a membrane and may create a difference in charge across that membrane   
pump active transport mechanism that works against electrochemical gradients   
receptor-mediated endocytosis variation of endocytosis that involves using specific binding proteins in the plasma membrane for specific molecules or particles, and clathrin-coated pits that become clathrin-coated vesicles   
secondary active transport movement of material that results from primary active transport to the electrochemical gradient   
selectively permeable membrane characteristic that allows some substances through   
solute substance dissolved in a liquid to form a solution   
symporter transporter that carries two different ions or small molecules, both in the same direction   
tonicity amount of solute in a solution   
transport protein membrane protein that facilitates a substance's passage across a membrane by binding it   
transporter specific carrier proteins or pumps that facilitate movement   
uniporter transporter that carries one specific ion or molecule

CHAPTER SUMMARY

5.1 Components and Structure 5.3 Active Transport

Modern scientists refer to the plasma membrane as the fluid mosaic model. A phospholipid bilayer comprises the plasma membrane, with hydrophobic, fatty acid tails in contact with each other. The membrane's landscape is studded with proteins, some which span the membrane. Some of these proteins serve to transport materials into or out of the cell. Carbohydrates are attached to some of the proteins and lipids on the membrane's outward-facing surface, forming complexes that function to identify the cell to other cells. The membrane's fluid nature is due to temperature, fatty acid tail configuration (some kinked by double bonds), cholesterol presence embedded in the membrane, and the mosaic nature of the proteins and protein-carbohydrate combinations, which are not firmly fixed in place. Plasma membranes enclose and define the cells' borders. Not static, they are dynamic and constantly in flux.

5.2 Passive Transport

The passive transport forms, diffusion and osmosis, move materials of small molecular weight across membranes. Substances diffuse from high to lower concentration areas, and this process continues until the substance evenly distributes itself in a system. In solutions containing more than one substance, each molecule type diffuses according to its own concentration gradient, independent of other substances diffusing. Many factors can affect the diffusion rate, such as concentration gradient, diffusing, particle sizes, and the system's temperature.

In living systems, the plasma membrane mediates substances diffusing in and out of cells. Some materials diffuse readily through the membrane, but others are hindered and only can pass through due to specialized proteins such as channels and transporters. The chemistry of living things occurs in aqueous solutions, and balancing the concentrations of those solutions is an ongoing problem. In living systems, diffusing some substances would be slow or difficult without membrane proteins that facilitate transport.

The combined gradient that affects an ion includes its concentration gradient and its electrical gradient. A positive ion, for example, might diffuse into a new area, down its concentration gradient, but if it is diffusing into an area of net positive charge, its electrical gradient hampers its diffusion. When dealing with ions in aqueous solutions, one must consider electrochemical and concentration gradient combinations, rather than just the concentration gradient alone. Living cells need certain substances that exist inside the cell in concentrations greater than they exist in the extracellular space. Moving substances up their electrochemical gradients requires energy from the cell. Active transport uses energy stored in ATP to fuel this transport. Active transport of small molecular-sized materials uses integral proteins in the cell membrane to move the materials. These proteins are analogous to pumps. Some pumps, which carry out primary active transport, couple directly with ATP to drive their action. In cotransport (or secondary active transport), energy from primary transport can move another substance into the cell and up its concentration gradient.

5.4 Bulk Transport

Active transport methods require directly using ATP to fuel the transport. In a process scientists call phagocytosis, other cells can engulf large particles, such as macromolecules, cell parts, or whole cells. In phagocytosis, a portion of the membrane invaginates and flows around the particle, eventually pinching off and leaving the particle entirely enclosed by a plasma membrane's envelope. The cell breaks down vesicle contents, with the particles either used as food or dispatched. Pinocytosis is a similar process on a smaller scale. The plasma membrane invaginates and pinches off, producing a small envelope of fluid from outside the cell. Pinocytosis imports substances that the cell needs from the extracellular fluid. The cell expels waste in a similar but reverse manner. It pushes a membranous vacuole to the plasma membrane, allowing the vacuole to fuse with the membrane and incorporate itself into the membrane structure, releasing its contents to the exterior.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 5.12 A doctor injects a patient with what the doctor thinks is an isotonic saline solution. The patient dies, and an autopsy reveals that many red blood cells have been destroyed. Do you think the solution the doctor injected was really isotonic?

2. Figure 5.16 Injecting a potassium solution into a person’s blood is lethal. Capital punishment and euthanasia utilize this method in their subjects. Why do you think a potassium solution injection is lethal?   
3. Figure 5.19 If the pH outside the cell decreases, would you expect the amount of amino acids transported into the cell to increase or decrease?

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. Which plasma membrane component can be either found on its surface or embedded in the membrane structure?

a. protein b. cholesterol c. carbohydrate d. phospholipid

5. Which characteristic of a phospholipid contributes to the fluidity of the membrane?

a. its head   
b. cholesterol   
c. a saturated fatty acid tail   
d. double bonds in the fatty acid tail

6. What is the primary function of carbohydrates attached to the exterior of cell membranes?

a. identification of the cell b. flexibility of the membrane c. strengthening the membrane d. channels through membrane

7. A scientist compares the plasma membrane composition of an animal from the Mediterranean coast with one from the Mojave Desert. Which hypothesis is most likely to be correct?

a. The cells from the Mediterranean coast animal will have more fluid plasma membranes.   
b. The cells from the Mojave Desert animal will have a higher cholesterol concentration in the plasma membranes.   
c. The cells’ plasma membranes will be indistinguishable.   
d. The cells from the Mediterranean coast animal will have a higher glycoprotein content, while the cells from the Mojave Desert animal will have a higher lipoprotein content.

8. Water moves via osmosis

a. throughout the cytoplasm   
b. from an area with a high concentration of other solutes to a lower one   
c. from an area with a high concentration of water to one of lower concentration   
d. from an area with a low concentration of water to higher concentration

9. The principal force driving movement in diffusion is the

a. temperature   
b. particle size   
c. concentration gradient d. membrane surface area

10. What problem is faced by organisms that live in fresh water?

a. Their bodies tend to take in too much water.   
b. They have no way of controlling their tonicity.   
c. Only salt water poses problems for animals that live in it.   
d. Their bodies tend to lose too much water to their environment.

11. In which situation would passive transport not use a transport protein for entry into a cell?

a. water flowing into a hypertonic environment b. glucose being absorbed from the blood c. an ion flowing into a nerve cell to create an electrical potential d. oxygen moving into a cell after oxygen deprivation

12. Active transport must function continuously because

a. plasma membranes wear out   
b. not all membranes are amphiphilic   
c. facilitated transport opposes active transport   
d. diffusion is constantly moving solutes in opposite directions

13. How does the sodium-potassium pump make the interior of the cell negatively charged?

a. by expelling anions   
b. by pulling in anions   
c. by expelling more cations than are taken in   
d. by taking in and expelling an equal number of cations

14. What is the combination of an electrical gradient and a concentration gradient called?

a. potential gradient b. electrical potential c. concentration potential d. electrochemical gradient

15. What happens to the membrane of a vesicle after exocytosis?

a. It leaves the cell.   
b. It is disassembled by the cell.   
c. It fuses with and becomes part of the plasma membrane.   
d. It is used again in another exocytosis event.

16. Which transport mechanism can bring whole cells into a cell?

a. pinocytosis   
b. phagocytosis   
c. facilitated transport   
d. primary active transport

17. In what important way does receptor-mediated endocytosis differ from phagocytosis?

a. It transports only small amounts of fluid.   
b. It does not involve the pinching off of membrane.   
c. It brings in only a specifically targeted substance.   
d. It brings substances into the cell, while phagocytosis removes substances.

18. Many viruses enter host cells through receptormediated endocytosis. What is an advantage of this entry strategy? a. The virus directly enters the cytoplasm of the cell. b. The virus is protected from recognition by white blood cells. c. The virus only enters its target host cell type. d. The virus can directly inject its genome into the cell’s nucleus.

19. Which of the following organelles relies on exocytosis to complete its function?

a. Golgi apparatus b. vacuole c. mitochondria d. endoplasmic reticulum

20. Imagine a cell can perform exocytosis, but only minimal endocytosis. What would happen to the cell?

a. The cell would secrete all its intracellular proteins.   
b. The plasma membrane would increase in size over time.   
c. The cell would stop expressing integral receptor proteins in its plasma membrane.   
d. The cell would lyse.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

21. Why is it advantageous for the cell membrane to be fluid in nature?   
22. Why do phospholipids tend to spontaneously orient themselves into something resembling a membrane?   
23. How can a cell use an extracellular peripheral protein as the receptor to transmit a signal into the cell?   
24. Discuss why the following affect the rate of diffusion: molecular size, temperature, solution density, and the distance that must be traveled.   
25. Why does water move through a membrane?   
26. Both of the regular intravenous solutions administered in medicine, normal saline and lactated Ringer’s solution, are isotonic. Why is this important?   
27. Describe two ways that decreasing temperature would affect the rate of diffusion of molecules across a cell’s plasma membrane.   
28. A cell develops a mutation in its potassium channels that prevents the ions from leaving the cell. If the cell’s aquaporins are still active, what will happen to the cell? Be sure to describe the tonicity and osmolarity of the cell.   
29. Where does the cell get energy for active transport processes?   
30. How does the sodium-potassium pump contribute to the net negative charge of the interior of the cell?   
31. Glucose from digested food enters intestinal epithelial cells by active transport. Why would intestinal cells use active transport when most body cells use facilitated diffusion?   
32. The sodium/calcium exchanger (NCX) transports sodium into and calcium out of cardiac muscle cells. Describe why this transporter is classified as secondary active transport.   
33. Why is it important that there are different types of proteins in plasma membranes for the transport of materials into and out of a cell?   
34. Why do ions have a difficult time getting through plasma membranes despite their small size?

INTRODUCTION Virtually every task performed by living organisms requires energy. Organisms require energy to perform heavy labor and exercise, but humans also use considerable energy while thinking, and even during sleep. Every organism's living cells constantly use energy. Organisms import nutrients and other molecules. They metabolize (break down) and possibly synthesize into new molecules. If necessary, molecules modify, move around the cell and may distribute themselves to the entire organism. For example, the large proteins that make up muscles are actively built from smaller molecules. Complex carbohydrates break down into simple sugars that the cell uses for energy. Just as energy is required to both build and demolish a building, energy is required to synthesize and break down molecules. Additionally, signaling molecules such as hormones and neurotransmitters transport between cells. Cells ingest and break down bacteria and viruses. Cells must also export waste and toxins to stay healthy, and many cells must swim or move surrounding materials via the beating motion of cellular appendages like cilia and flagella.

The cellular processes that we listed above require a steady supply of energy. From where, and in what form, does this energy come? How do living cells obtain energy, and how do they use it? This chapter will discuss different forms of energy and the physical laws that govern energy transfer. This chapter will also describe how cells use energy and replenish it, and how chemical reactions in the cell perform with great efficiency.