13.8 Storage

Out of all the peripheral devices that are typically attached to a processor, storage devices have a special place. This is primarily because they are integral to the functioning of the computer system.

The storage devices maintain persistent state. Persistent state refers to all the data that is stored in the computer system even when it is powered off. Notably, the storage systems store the operating system, all the programs, and their associated data. This includes all our documents, songs, images, and videos. From the point of view of a computer architect, the storage system plays an active role in the boot process, saving files and data, and virtual memory. Let us discuss each of these roles one by one.

When a processor starts (process is known as booting), it needs to load the code of the operating system. Typically, the code of the operating system is available at the beginning of the address space of the primary hard disk. The processor then loads the code of the operating system into main memory, and starts executing it. After the boot process, the operating system is available to users, who can use it to run programs, and access data. Programs are saved as regular files in the storage system, and data is also saved in files. Files are essentially blocks of data in the hard disk, or similar storage devices. These blocks of data need to be read into main memory such that they are accessible by the processor.

Lastly storage devices play a very important role in implementing virtual memory. They store the swap space (see Section 11.4.4). Recall that the swap space contains all the frames that cannot be contained in main memory. It effectively helps to extend the physical address space to match the size of the virtual address space. Part of the frames are stored in main memory, and the remaining frames are stored in the swap space. They are brought into (swapped in), when there is a page fault.

Almost all types of computers have attached storage devices. There, however can be some exceptions. Some machines especially, in a lab setting, might access a hard disk over the network. They typically use a network boot protocol to boot from a remote hard disk, and access all the files including the swap space over the network. Conceptually, they still have an attached storage device. It is just not physically attached to the motherboard. It is nonetheless, accessible over the network.

Now, let us take a look at the main storage technologies. Traditionally, magnetic storage has been the dominant technology. This storage technology records the values of bits in tiny areas of a large ferro-magnetic disk. Depending on the state of magnetization, we can either infer a logical 0 or 1. Instead of magnetic disk technology, we can use optical technology such as CD/DVD/Blu-ray drives. A CD/DVD/Blu-ray disk contains a sequence of pits (aberrations on the surface) that encodes a sequence of binary values. The optical disk drive uses a laser to read the values stored on the disk. Most of the operations of a computer typically access the hard disk, whereas optical disks are mainly used to archive videos and music. However, it is not uncommon to boot from the optical drives.

A fast emerging alternative to magnetic disks, and optical drives is solid state drives. Unlike magnetic, and optical drives that have moving parts, solid state drives are made of semiconductors. The most common technology used in solid state drives is flash. A flash memory device uses charge stored in a semiconductor to signify a logical 0 or 1. They are much faster than traditional hard drives. However, they can store far less data, and as of 2012, are 5-6 times more expensive. Hence, high-end servers opt for hybrid solutions. They have a fast SSD drive that acts as a cache for a much larger hard drive.

Let us now take a look at each of these technologies. Note that in this book, our aim is to give the reader an understanding of the basic storage technologies such that she can optimize the computer architecture. For a deeper understanding of storage technologies the reader can take a look at [Brewer and Gill, 2008, Micheloni et al., 2010].