5.2 Antiderivatives

The symbol  was invented by Leibniz to represent the integral. It is a stretched-out S, from the Latin word for sum. This symbol is a powerful reminder of the whole construction: Sum approaches integral, S approaches  , and rectangular area approaches curved area:

The rectangles of base  lead to this limit—the integral of  . The  ” indicates that  approaches zero. The heights  of the rectangles are the heights  of the curve. The sum of  times  approaches “the integral of  of  .” You can imagine an infinitely thin rectangle above every point, instead of ordinary rectangles above special points.

We now find the area under the square root curve. The “limits of integration” are 0 and 4. The lower limit is  , where the area begins. (The »start could be any point  .) The upper limit is  , since we stop after four years. (The finish couldÑbe any point  .) The area of the rectangles is a sum of base  times heights  . The curved area is the limit of this sum. That limit is the integral of  from 0 to 4:

The outstanding problem of integral calculus is still to be solved?. What is this limiting area? We have a symbol for the answer, involving  and  and  —but we don’t have a number.

THE ANTIDERIVATIVE

I wish I knew who discovered the area under the graph of  . It may have been Newton. The answer was available earlier, but the key idea was shared by Newton and Leibniz. They understood the parallels between sums and integrals, and between differences and derivatives. I can give the answer, by following that analogy. I can’t give the proof (yet)—it is the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

In algebra the difference  is  . When we add, the sum of the  ’s is  . In calculus the derivative of  is  . When we integrate, the area under the  curve is  minus  . Our problem asks for the area out to  4:

5B (Discrete vs. continuous, rectangles vs. c?urved areas, addition vs. integration) The integral of  is the difference in  :?  (3)

What is  Instead of the derivative of  , we need its “antiderivative.” We have to find a function  whose derivative is  . It is the opposite of Chapters  ; and requires us to work backwards. The derivative of  is  —now we need the antiderivative. The quick formula is  —we aim to understand it.

Solution Since the derivative lowers the exponent, the antiderivative raises it. We go from  to  . But then the derivative is  . It contains an unwanted factor 3=2. To cancel that factor, put  into the antiderivative:

 has the required derivative  :

There you see the key to integrals: Work backward from derivatives (and adjust). Now comes a number—the exact area. At  we find  . Multiply by  to get  . Then subtract  :

The total income over four years is  million dollars. This is   . The sum from thousands of rectangles was slowly app?roaching this exact area  .

Other areas The income in the first year, at  , is  million dollars. (The false income was 1 million dollars.) The total income after  years is  , which is the antiderivative  . The square root curve covers  of the overall rectangle it sits in. The rectangle goes out to  and up to  , with area  , and  of that rectangle is below the curve.  is above.)

Other antiderivatives The derivative of  is  . Therefore the antiderivative of  is  . Divide by  to cancel the 5 (or  ) from the derivative. And don’t allow  :

The der?ivative  has the a?ntiderivative  :

EXAMPLE 1 The antiderivative of  is  . This is the area under the parabola  . The area out to  is  , or  .

Remark on  and  The  from  and the  from  add to 1. Those are the areas below and above the  curve, in the corner of Figure 5.3. If you turn the curve by  , it becomes the parabola. The functions  and  are inverses! The areas for these inverse functions add to a square of area 1.

AREA UNDER A STRAIGHT LINE

You already know the area of a triangle. The region is below the diagonal line  in Figure 5.4. The base is 4, the height is 4, and the area is  . Integration is

not required! But if you allow calculus to repeat that answer, and build up the integral  as the limiting area of many rectangles, you will have the beginning of something important.

The four rectangles have area  . That is greater than 8, because the triangle is inside. 10 is a first approximation to the triangular area 8, and to improve it we need more rectangles.

The next rectangles will be thinner, of width  instead of the original  . There will be eight rectangles instead of four. They extend above the line, so the answer is still too high. The new heights are  The total area in Figure  is the sum of the base  times those heights:

Question What is the area of 16 rectangle s? Their heights are  Answer With base  the area is  .

The effort of doing the addition is increasing. A formula for the sums is needed, and will be established soon. (The next answer would be  .) But more important than the formula is the idea. We are carrying out a Iimiting process, one step at a time. The area of the rectangles is approaching the area of the triangle, as  decreases. The same limiting process will apply to other areas, in which the region is much more complicated. Therefore we pause to comment on what is important.

Area Under a Curve

What requirements are imposed on those thinner and thinner rectangles? It is not essential that they all have the same width. And it is not required that they cover the triangle completely. The rectangles could lie below the curve. The limiting answer will still be 8, even if the widths  are unequal and the rectangles fit inside the triangle or across it. We only impose two rules:

1. The largest width  must approach zero.   
2. The top of each rectangle must touch or cross the curve.

The area under the graph is defined to be the limit of these rectangular areas, if that limit exists. For the straight line, the limit does exist and equals 8. That limit is independent of the particular widths and heights—as we absolutely insist it should be.

Section 5.5 allows any continuous  . The question will be the same—Does the limit exist? The answer will be the same—Yes. That limit will be the integral of  , and it will be the area under the curve. It will be  .

EXAMPLE 2 The triangular area from 0 to  is  . That is  . Its derivative is  . But notice that  has the same derivative. So does  , for any constant  . There is a “constant of integration” in  , which is wiped out in its derivative  .

EXAMPLE 3 Suppose the velocity is decreasing:  . If we sample  at  ; the rectangles lie under the graph. B ecause  is decreasing, the right end of each interval gives  . Then the rectangular area  is less than the exact area 8. The rectangles are inside the triangle, and eight rectangles with base  come closer:

Sixteen rectangles would have area  . We repeat that the rectangles need not have the same widths  , but it makes these calculations easier.

What is the area out to an arbitrarypoint (like  or  )? We could insert rectangles, but the Fundamental Theorem offers a faster way. Any antiderivative of  will give the area. We look for a function whose derivative is  . The derivative of  is 4, the derivative of  is  , so work backward:

Calculus skips past the rectangles and computes  . The area between  1 and  is the difference  . In Figure 5.5, this is the area of the trapezoid.

The f-curve flattens out when the  -curve touches zero. No new area is being added.

5 Integrals

INDEFINITE INTEGRALS AND DEFINITEINTEGRALS

We have to distinguish two different kinds of integrals. They both use the antiderivative  . The definite one involves the limits 0 and 4, the indefinite one doesn’t:

The indefinite integral is a function  .   
The definite integral from  to  is the number  .

The definite integral is definitely 8. Butthe indefinite integral is not necessarily  . We can change  by a constant without changing its derivative (since the derivative of a constant is zero). The following functions are also antiderivatives:

The first two are particular examples. The last is the general case. The constant  can be anything (including zero), to give all functions with the required derivative. The theory of calculus will show that there are no others. The indefinite integral is the most general antiderivative (with no limits):

By contrast, the definite integral is a number. It contains no arbitrary constant  . More that that, it contains no variable  . The definite integral is determined by the function  and the limits of integration (also known as the endpoints). It is the area under the graph between those endpoints.

To see the relation of indefinite todefinite, answer thisquestion: What is the definite integral between  and  The indefinite integral gives  and  . To find the area between the limits, subtract  at one limit from  at the other limit:

The constant cancels itself! The definite integral is the difference between the values of the indefinite integ»ral.  disappea»rs in the subtraction.

The difference  is like  . The sum of  from 1 to  has become “the integral of  from 1 to 3.” Section 5.3 computes other areas from sums, and 5:4 computes many more from antiderivatives. Then we come back to the definite integral and the Fundamental Theorem: