31.9 Summary
Semaphores are a powerful and flexible primitive for writing concurrent programs. Some programmers use them exclusively, shunning locks and condition variables, due to their simplicity and utility.  
In this chapter, we have presented just a few classic problems and solutions. If you are interested in finding out more, there are many other materials you can reference. One great (and free reference) is Allen Downey’s book on concurrency and programming with semaphores [D08]. This book has lots of puzzles you can work on to improve your understand  
TIP: BE CAREFUL WITH GENERALIZATION  
The abstract technique of generalization can thus be quite useful in systems design, where one good idea can be made slightly broader and thus solve a larger class of problems. However, be careful when generalizing; as Lampson warns us “Don’t generalize; generalizations are generally wrong” [L83].  
One could view semaphores as a generalization of locks and condition variables; however, is such a generalization needed? And, given the difficulty of realizing a condition variable on top of a semaphore, perhaps this generalization is not as general as you might think.  
ing of both semaphores in specific and concurrency in general. Becoming a real concurrency expert takes years of effort; going beyond what you learn in this class is undoubtedly the key to mastering such a topic.  
References 
[B04] “Implementing Condition Variables with Semaphores” by Andrew Birrell. December 2004. An interesting read on how difficult implementing CVs on top of semaphores really is, and the mistakes the author and co-workers made along the way. Particularly relevant because the group had done a ton of concurrent programming; Birrell, for example, is known for (among other things) writing various thread-programming guides. 
[CB08] “Real-world Concurrency” by Bryan Cantrill, Jeff Bonwick. ACM Queue. Volume 6, No. 5. September 2008. A nice article by some kernel hackers from a company formerly known as Sun on the real problems faced in concurrent code. 
[CHP71] “Concurrent Control with Readers and Writers” by P.J. Courtois, F. Heymans, D.L. Parnas. Communications of the ACM, 14:10, October 1971. The introduction of the reader-writer problem, and a simple solution. Later work introduced more complex solutions, skipped here because, well, they are pretty complex. 
[D59] “A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with Graphs” by E. W. Dijkstra. Numerische Mathematik 1, 269–271, 1959. Available: http://www-m3.ma.tum.de/twiki/pub/MN0506/ WebHome/dijkstra.pdf. Can you believe people worked on algorithms in 1959? We can’t. Even before computers were any fun to use, these people had a sense that they would transform the world... [D68a] “Go-to Statement Considered Harmful” by E.W. Dijkstra. CACM, volume 11(3), March 1968. http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/ewd02xx/EWD215.PDF. Sometimes thought of as the beginning of the field of software engineering. 
[D68b] “The Structure of the THE Multiprogramming System” by E.W. Dijkstra. CACM, volume 11(5), 1968. One of the earliest papers to point out that systems work in computer science is an engaging intellectual endeavor. Also argues strongly for modularity in the form of layered systems. [D72] “Information Streams Sharing a Finite Buffer” by E.W. Dijkstra. Information Processing Letters 1, 1972. http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/ewd03xx/EWD329.PDF. Did Dijkstra invent everything? No, but maybe close. He certainly was the first to clearly write down what the problems were in concurrent code. However, practitioners in OS design knew of many of the problems described by Dijkstra, so perhaps giving him too much credit would be a misrepresentation. [D08] “The Little Book of Semaphores” by A.B. Downey. Available at the following site: http://greenteapress.com/semaphores/. A nice (and free!) book about semaphores. Lots of fun problems to solve, if you like that sort of thing. 
[D71] “Hierarchical ordering of sequential processes” by E.W. Dijkstra. Available online here: http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/ewd03xx/EWD310.PDF. Presents numerous concurrency problems, including Dining Philosophers. The wikipedia page about this problem is also useful. [GR92] “Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques” by Jim Gray, Andreas Reuter. Morgan Kaufmann, September 1992. The exact quote that we find particularly humorous is found on page 485, at the top of Section 8.8: “The first multiprocessors, circa 1960, had test and set instructions ... presumably the OS implementors worked out the appropriate algorithms, although Dijkstra is generally credited with inventing semaphores many years later.” Oh, snap! 
[H87] “Aspects of Cache Memory and Instruction Buffer Performance” by Mark D. Hill. Ph.D. Dissertation, U.C. Berkeley, 1987. Hill’s dissertation work, for those obsessed with caching in early systems. A great example of a quantitative dissertation. 
[L83] “Hints for Computer Systems Design” by Butler Lampson. ACM Operating Systems Review, 15:5, October 1983. Lampson, a famous systems researcher, loved using hints in the design of computer systems. A hint is something that is often correct but can be wrong; in this use, a signal() is telling a waiting thread that it changed the condition that the waiter was waiting on, but not to trust that the condition will be in the desired state when the waiting thread wakes up. In this paper about hints for designing systems, one of Lampson’s general hints is that you should use hints. It is not as confusing as it sounds. 
[T99] “Re: NT kernel guy playing with Linux” by Linus Torvalds. June 27, 1999. Available: https://yarchive.net/comp/linux/semaphores.html. A response from Linus himself about the utility of semaphores, including the throttling case we mention in the text. As always, Linus is slightly insulting but quite informative.  
Homework (Code)
In this homework, we’ll use semaphores to solve some well-known concurrency problems. Many of these are taken from Downey’s excellent “Little Book of Semaphores”3, which does a good job of pulling together a number of classic problems as well as introducing a few new variants; interested readers should check out the Little Book for more fun.  
Each of the following questions provides a code skeleton; your job is to fill in the code to make it work given semaphores. On Linux, you will be using native semaphores; on a Mac (where there is no semaphore support), you’ll have to first build an implementation (using locks and condition variables, as described in the chapter). Good luck!  
