13.7.1 PCI Express R⃝

Overview

Most motherboards require local buses that can be used to attach devices such as dedicated sound cards, network cards, and graphics cards to the North Bridge or South Bridge chips. In response to this requirement, a consortium of companies created the PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect) bus specification in 1993. In 1996, Intel created the AGP (Accelerated Graphics Port) bus for connecting graphics cards. In the late nineties, many new bus types were being proposed for connecting a variety of hardware devices to the North Bridge and South Bridge chips. Designers quickly realized that having numerous bus protocols hampers standardization efforts, and compels device vendors to support multiple bus protocols. Hence, a consortium of companies started a standardization effort, and created the PCI Express bus standard in 2004. This technology superseded most of the earlier technologies, and till date it is the most popular bus on the motherboard.

The basic idea of the PCI Express bus is that it is a high-speed point-to-point serial (single bit) interconnect. A point-to-point interconnect has only two end points. To connect multiple devices to the South Bridge chip, we create a tree of PCI Express devices. The internal nodes of the tree are PCI Express switches that can multiplex traffic from multiple devices. Secondly, as compared to older protocols, each PCI Express bus sends bits serially on a single bit line. Typically, high speed buses avoid transmitting multiple bits in parallel using several copper wires, because different links experience different degrees of jitter and signal distortion. It becomes very hard to keep all the signals in the different wires in synchrony with each other. Hence, modern buses are mostly serial.

A single PCI Express bus is actually composed of many individual serial buses known as lanes. Each lane has its separate physical layer. A PCI Express packet is striped across the lanes. Striping means dividing a block of data (packet) into smaller blocks of data and distributing them across the lanes. For example, in a bus with 8 lanes, and an 8-bit packet, we can send each bit of the packet on a separate lane. The reader needs to note that sending multiple bits in parallel across different lanes is not the same as a parallel bus that has multiple wires to send data. This is because a parallel bus has one physical layer circuit for all the copper wires, whereas in this case, each lane has its separate synchronization, and timing. The data link layer does the job of framing by aggregating the subparts of each packet collected from the different lanes.

Definition 159

The process of striping refers to dividing a block of data into smaller blocks of data and distributing them across a set of entities.

A lane consists of two LVDS-based wires for full duplex signaling. One wire is used to send a message from the first end point to the second, and the second wire is to send a signal in the reverse direction. A set of lanes are grouped together to form an I/O link that is assumed to transfer a full packet (or frame) of data. The physical layer then transfers a packet to the data link layer that performs error correction, flow control, and implements transactions. The PCI

Express protocol is a layered protocol, where the functionality of each layer is roughly similar to the I/O layers that we have defined. Instead of considering transactions to be a part of the data link layer, it has a separate transaction layer. We shall however use the terminology that we have defined in this chapter for explaining all the I/O protocols unless mentioned otherwise.

Summary

A summary of the specifications of the PCI Express protocol is shown in Table 13.5. We can have 1-32 lanes. Here, each lane is an asynchronous bus, which uses a sophisticated version of data encoding called the 8bit/10bit encoding. The 8bit/10bit encoding can be conceptually thought of as an extension of the NRZ protocol. It maps a sequence of 8 logical bits to a sequence of 10 physical bits. It ensures that we do not have more than five 1s or 0s consecutively such that we can efficiently recover the clock. Recall that the receiver recovers the sender’s clock by analyzing transitions in the data. Secondly, the encoding ensures that we have almost the same number of physical 1s and 0s in the transmitted signal. In the data link layer the PCI Express protocol implements a split transaction bus with a 1-128 byte frame, and 32-bit CRC-based error correction.

The PCI Express bus is normally used to connect generic I/O devices. Sometimes some slots are left unused such that users can later connect cards for their specific applications. For example, if a user is interested in working with specialized medical devices, then she can attach an I/O card that can connect with medical devices externally, and to the PCI Express bus internally. Such free PCI Express slots are known as expansion slots.