7.1.3 NMOS Transistor

Now, let us connect two p-n junctions to each other as shown in Figure 7.3(a). This structure is known as an NMOS (Negative Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor) transistor. In this figure there is a central substrate of p type doped silicon. There are two small regions on both sides that contain n type doped silicon. These regions are known as the drain and source, respectively. Note that since the structure is totally symmetric, any of these two regions can be designated as the source or the drain. The region in the middle of the source and drain is known as the channel. On top of the channel there is a thin insulating layer typically made of silicon dioxide  , and it is covered by a metallic or polysilicon-based conducting layer. This is known as the gate.

There are thus three terminals of a typical NMOS transistor – source, drain and gate. Each of them can be connected to a voltage source. We now have two options for the gate voltage – logical 1 (  volts) or logical 0 (0 volts). If the voltage at the gate is logical 1 (  volts), then the electrons in the channel get attracted towards the gate. In fact, if the voltage at the gate is larger that a certain threshold voltage (typically 0.15 V in current technologies), then a low resistance conducting path forms between the drain and the source due to the accumulation of electrons. Thus, current can flow between the drain and the source. If the effective resistance of the channel is  , then we have  . If the amount of current flow through the transistor is low, then  is roughly equal to  because of the low channel resistance  . We can thus treat the NMOS transistor as a switch (see Figure 7.3(b)). It is turned on when the voltage of the gate is  .

Now, if we set the voltage at the gate to 0, then a conducting path made up of electrons cannot form in the channel. Hence, the transistor will not be able to conduct current. It will be in the off state. In this case, the switch is turned off.

The circuit symbol for a NMOS transistor is shown in Figure 7.3(c).