7.7 Regulation of Cellular Respiration

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

• Describe how feedback inhibition would affect the production of an intermediate or product in a pathway • Identify the mechanism that controls the rate of the transport of electrons through the electron transport chain

Celularrespirationmust be regulated in order to provide balanced amounts of energy in the form of ATP. The cell also must generate a number of intermediate compounds that are used in the anabolism and catabolism of macromolecules. Without controls, metabolic reactions would quickly come to a standstill as the forward and backward reactions reached a state of equilibrium. Resources would be used inappropriately. A cell does not need the maximum amount of ATP that it can make all the time: At times, the cell needs to shunt some of the intermediates to pathways for amino acid, protein, glycogen, lipid, and nucleic acid production. In short, the cell needs to control its metabolism.

Regulatory Mechanisms

A variety of mechanisms is used to control cellular respiration. Some type of control exists at each stage of glucose metabolism.   
Access of glucose to the cell can be regulated using the GLUT (glucose transporter) proteins that transport glucose (Figure 7.18).

Different forms of the GLUT protein control passage of glucose into the cells of specific tissues.

Some reactions are controlled by having two different enzymes—one each for the two directions of a reversible reaction. Reactions that are catalyzed by only one enzyme can go to equilibrium, stalling the reaction. In contrast, if two different enzymes (each specific for a given direction) are necessary for a reversible reaction, the opportunity to control the rate of the reaction increases, and equilibrium is not reached.

A number of enzymes involved in each of the pathways—in particular, the enzyme catalyzing the first committed reaction of the pathway—are controlled by attachment of a molecule to an allosteric site on the protein. The molecules most commonly used in this capacity are the nucleotides ATP, ADP, AMP,  , and NADH. These regulators—allosteric effectors—may increase or decrease enzyme activity, depending on the prevailing conditions. The allosteric effector alters the steric structure of the enzyme, usually affecting the configuration of the active site. This alteration of the protein’s (the enzyme’s) structure either increases or decreases its affinity for its substrate, with the effect of increasing or decreasing the rate of the reaction. The attachment signals to the enzyme. This binding can increase or decrease the enzyme’s activity, providing a feedback mechanism. This feedback type of control is effective as long as the chemical affecting it is attached to the enzyme. Once the overall concentration of the chemical decreases, it will diffuse away from the protein, and the control is relaxed.

Control of Catabolic Pathways

Enzymes, proteins, electron carriers, and pumps that play roles in glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the electron transport chain tend to catalyze nonreversible reactions. In other words, if the initial reaction takes place, the pathway is committed to proceeding with the remaining reactions. Whether a particular enzyme activity is released depends upon the energy needs of the cell (as reflected by the levels of ATP, ADP, and AMP).

Glycolysis

The control of glycolysis begins with the first enzyme in the pathway, hexokinase (Figure 7.19). This enzyme catalyzes the phosphorylation of glucose, which helps to prepare the compound for cleavage in a later step. The presence of the negatively charged phosphate in the molecule also prevents the sugar from leaving the cell. When hexokinase is inhibited, glucose diffuses out of the cell and does not become a substrate for the respiration pathways in that tissue. The product of the hexokinase reaction is glucose-6-phosphate, which accumulates when a later enzyme, phosphofructokinase, is inhibited.

Phosphofructokinase is the main enzyme controlled in glycolysis. High levels of ATP or citrate or a lower, more acidic pH decreases the enzyme’s activity. An increase in citrate concentration can occur because of a blockage in the citric acid cycle. Fermentation, with its production of organic acids such as lactic acid, frequently accounts for the increased acidity in a cell; however, the products of fermentation do not typically accumulate in cells.

The last step in glycolysis is catalyzed by pyruvate kinase. The pyruvate produced can proceed to be catabolized or converted into the amino acid alanine. If no more energy is needed and alanine is in adequate supply, the enzyme is inhibited. The enzyme’s activity is increased when fructose-1,6-bisphosphate levels increase. (Recall that fructose-1,6-bisphosphate is an intermediate in the first half of glycolysis.) The regulation of pyruvate kinase involves phosphorylation by a kinase (pyruvate kinase), resulting in a less-active enzyme. Dephosphorylation by a phosphatase reactivates it. Pyruvate kinase is also regulated by ATP (a negative allosteric effect).

If more energy is needed, more pyruvate will be converted into acetyl CoA through the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase. If either acetyl groups or NADH accumulates, there is less need for the reaction, and the rate decreases. Pyruvate dehydrogenase is also regulated by phosphorylation: a kinase phosphorylates it to form an inactive enzyme, and a phosphatase reactivates it. The kinase and the phosphatase are also regulated.

Citric Acid Cycle

The citric acid cycle is controlled through the enzymes that catalyze the reactions that make the first two molecules of NADH (Figure 7.9). These enzymes are isocitrate dehydrogenase and  -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. When adequate ATP and NADH levels are available, the rates of these reactions decrease. When more ATP is needed, as reflected in rising ADP levels, the rate increases. Alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase will also be affected by the levels of succinyl CoA—a subsequent intermediate in the cycle—causing a decrease in activity. A decrease in the rate of operation of the pathway at this point is not necessarily negative, as the increased levels of the  -ketoglutarate not used by the citric acid cycle can be used by the cell for amino acid (glutamate) synthesis.

Electron Transport Chain

Specific enzymes of the electron transport chain are unaffected by feedback inhibition, but the rate of electron transport through the pathway is affected by the levels of ADP and ATP. Greater ATP consumption by a cell is indicated by a buildup of

ADP. As ATP usage decreases, the concentration of ADP decreases, and now, ATP begins to build up in the cell. This change in the relative concentration of ADP to ATP triggers the cell to slow down the electron transport chain.

LINK TO LEARNING

Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/electron_transp) to see an animation of the electron transport chain and ATP synthesis.

For a summary of feedback controls in cellular respiration, see Table 7.1.

Summary of Feedback Controls in Cellular Respiration

KEY TERMS

acetyl CoA combination of an acetyl group derived from pyruvic acid and coenzyme A, which is made from pantothenic acid (a B-group vitamin)   
aerobic respiration process in which organisms convert energy in the presence of oxygen   
anaerobic process that does not use oxygen   
anaerobic cellular respiration process in which organisms convert energy for their use in the absence of oxygen   
ATP synthase (also F1F0 ATP synthase) membraneembedded protein complex that adds a phosphate to ADP with energy from protons diffusing through it   
chemiosmosis process in which there is a production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in cellular metabolism by the involvement of a proton gradient across a membrane   
citric acid cycle (also Krebs cycle) series of enzymecatalyzed chemical reactions of central importance in all living cells for extraction of energy from carbohydrates   
dephosphorylation removal of a phosphate group from a molecule   
fermentation process of regenerating NAD+ with either an inorganic or organic compound serving as the final electron acceptor; occurs in the absence of oxygen   
GLUT protein integral membrane protein that transports glucose   
glycolysis process of breaking glucose into two threecarbon molecules with the production of ATP and NADH   
isomerase enzyme that converts a molecule into its isomer   
Krebs cycle (also citric acid cycle) alternate name for the citric acid cycle, named after Hans Krebs, who first identified the steps in the pathway in the 1930s in pigeon flight muscles; see citric acid cycle   
oxidative phosphorylation production of ATP using the process of chemiosmosis in the presence of oxygen   
phosphorylation addition of a high-energy phosphate to a compound, usually a metabolic intermediate, a protein, or ADP   
prosthetic group (also prosthetic cofactor) molecule bound to a protein that facilitates the function of the protein   
pyruvate three-carbon sugar that can be decarboxylated and oxidized to make acetyl CoA, which enters the citric acid cycle under aerobic conditions; the end product of glycolysis   
redox reaction chemical reaction that consists of the coupling of an oxidation reaction and a reduction reaction   
substrate-level phosphorylation production of ATP from ADP using the excess energy from a chemical reaction and a phosphate group from a reactant   
TCA cycle (also citric acid cycle) alternate name for the citric acid cycle, named after the group name for citric acid, tricarboxylic acid (TCA); see citric acid cycle   
ubiquinone soluble electron transporter in the electron transport chain that connects the first or second complex to the third

CHAPTER SUMMARY 7.1 Energy in Living Systems

ATP functions as the energy currency for cells. It allows the cell to store energy briefly and transport it within the cell to support endergonic chemical reactions. The structure of ATP is that of an RNA nucleotide with three phosphates attached. As ATP is used for energy, a phosphate group or two are detached, and either ADP or AMP is produced. Energy derived from glucose catabolism is used to convert ADP into ATP. When ATP is used in a reaction, the third phosphate is temporarily attached to a substrate in a process called phosphorylation. The two processes of ATP regeneration that are used in conjunction with glucose catabolism are substrate-level phosphorylation and oxidative phosphorylation through the process of chemiosmosis.

7.2 Glycolysis

Glycolysis is the first pathway within the cytoplasm used in the breakdown of glucose to extract energy. It was probably one of the earliest metabolic pathways to evolve and is used by nearly all of the organisms on Earth. Glycolysis consists of two parts: The first part prepares the six-carbon ring of

glucose for cleavage into two three-carbon sugars. ATP is invested in the process during this half to energize the separation. The second half of glycolysis extracts ATP and high-energy electrons from hydrogen atoms and attaches them to  . Two ATP molecules are invested in the first half and four ATP molecules are formed by substrate phosphorylation during the second half. This produces a net gain of two ATP and two NADH molecules for the cell.

7.3 Oxidation of Pyruvate and the Citric Acid Cycle

In the presence of oxygen, pyruvate is transformed into an acetyl group attached to a carrier molecule of coenzyme A. The resulting acetyl CoA can enter several pathways, but most often, the acetyl group is delivered to the citric acid cycle for further catabolism. During the conversion of pyruvate into the acetyl group, a molecule of carbon dioxide and two high-energy electrons are removed. The carbon dioxide accounts for two (conversion of two pyruvate molecules) of the six carbons of the original glucose molecule. The electrons are picked up by  , and the NADH carries the electrons to a later pathway for ATP

production. At this point, the glucose molecule that originally entered cellular respiration has been completely oxidized. Chemical potential energy stored within the glucose molecule has been transferred to electron carriers or has been used to synthesize a few ATPs.

The citric acid cycle is a series of redox and decarboxylation reactions that removes high-energy electrons and carbon dioxide. The electrons, temporarily stored in molecules of NADH and  , are used to generate ATP in a subsequent pathway. One molecule of either GTP or ATP is produced by substrate-level phosphorylation on each turn of the cycle. There is no comparison of the cyclic pathway with a linear one.

7.4 Oxidative Phosphorylation

The electron transport chain is the portion of aerobic respiration that uses free oxygen as the final electron acceptor of the electrons removed from the intermediate compounds in glucose catabolism. The electron transport chain is composed of four large, multiprotein complexes embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane and two small diffusible electron carriers shuttling electrons between them. The electrons are passed through a series of redox reactions, with a small amount of free energy used at three points to transport hydrogen ions across a membrane. This process contributes to the gradient used in chemiosmosis. The electrons passing through the electron transport chain gradually lose energy. High-energy electrons donated to the chain by either NADH or  complete the chain, as lowenergy electrons reduce oxygen molecules and form water. The level of free energy of the electrons drops from about 60 kcal/mol in NADH or  in  to about 0 kcal/ mol in water. The end products of the electron transport chain are water and ATP. A number of intermediate compounds of the citric acid cycle can be diverted into the anabolism of other biochemical molecules, such as nonessential amino acids, sugars, and lipids. These same molecules can serve as energy sources for the glucose

pathways.

7.5 Metabolism without Oxygen

If NADH cannot be oxidized through aerobic respiration, another electron acceptor is used. Most organisms will use some form of fermentation to accomplish the regeneration of  , ensuring the continuation of glycolysis. The regeneration of  in fermentation is not accompanied by ATP production; therefore, the potential of NADH to produce ATP using an electron transport chain is not utilized.

7.6 Connections of Carbohydrate, Protein, and Lipid Metabolic Pathways

The breakdown and synthesis of carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids connect with the pathways of glucose catabolism. The simple sugars are galactose, fructose, glycogen, and pentose. These are catabolized during glycolysis. The amino acids from proteins connect with glucose catabolism through pyruvate, acetyl CoA, and components of the citric acid cycle. Cholesterol synthesis starts with acetyl groups, and the components of triglycerides come from glycerol-3-phosphate from glycolysis and acetyl groups produced in the mitochondria from pyruvate.

7.7 Regulation of Cellular Respiration

Cellular respiration is controlled by a variety of means. The entry of glucose into a cell is controlled by the transport proteins that aid glucose passage through the cell membrane. Most of the control of the respiration processes is accomplished through the control of specific enzymes in the pathways. This is a type of negative feedback mechanism, turning the enzymes off. The enzymes respond most often to the levels of the available nucleosides ATP, ADP, AMP, NAD+, and FAD. Other intermediates of the pathway also affect certain enzymes in the systems.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 7.11 Dinitrophenol (DNP) is an "uncoupler" that makes the inner mitochondrial membrane "leaky" to protons. It was used until 1938 as a weight-loss drug. What effect would you expect DNP to have on the change in pH across the inner mitochondrial membrane? Why do you think this might be an effective weight-loss drug?   
2. Figure 7.12 Cyanide inhibits cytochrome c oxidase, a component of the electron transport chain. If cyanide poisoning occurs, would you expect the pH of the intermembrane space to increase or decrease? What effect would cyanide have on ATP synthesis?

3. Figure 7.14 Tremetol, a metabolic poison found in the white snake root plant, prevents the metabolism of lactate. When cows eat this plant, tremetol is concentrated in the milk they produce. Humans who consume the milk can become seriously ill. Symptoms of this disease, which include vomiting, abdominal pain, and tremors, become worse after exercise. Why do you think this is the case?

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. The energy currency used by cells is

a. ATP   
b. ADP   
c. AMP   
d. adenosine

5. A reducing chemical reaction a. reduces the compound to a simpler form b. adds an electron to the substrate c. removes a hydrogen atom from the substrate d. is a catabolic reaction

6. During the second half of glycolysis, what occurs?

a. ATP is used up.   
b. Fructose is split in two.   
c. ATP is made.   
d. Glucose becomes fructose.

7. What is removed from pyruvate during its conversion into an acetyl group?

a. oxygen   
b. ATP   
c. B vitamin   
d. carbon dioxide

8. What do the electrons added to  do?

a. They become part of a fermentation pathway.   
b. They go to another pathway for ATP production.   
c. They energize the entry of the acetyl group into the citric acid cycle.   
d. They are converted to NADP.

9. GTP or ATP is produced during the conversion of a. isocitrate into  -ketoglutarate b. succinyl CoA into succinate c. fumarate into malate d. malate into oxaloacetate

10. How many NADH molecules are produced on each turn of the citric acid cycle?

a. one b. two c. three d. four

11. What compound receives electrons from NADH?

a. FMN   
b. ubiquinone   
c. cytochrome    
d. oxygen

12. Chemiosmosis involves

a. the movement of electrons across the cell membrane   
b. the movement of hydrogen atoms across a mitochondrial membrane   
c. the movement of hydrogen ions across a mitochondrial membrane   
d. the movement of glucose through the cell membrane

13. Which of the following fermentation methods can occur in animal skeletal muscles?

a. lactic acid fermentation b. alcohol fermentation c. mixed acid fermentation d. propionic fermentation

14. A major connection for sugars in glycolysis is a. glucose-6-phosphate b. fructose-1,6-bisphosphate c. dihydroxyacetone phosphate d. phosphoenolpyruvate

15. Beta-oxidation is

a. the breakdown of sugars   
b. the assembly of sugars   
c. the breakdown of fatty acids   
d. the removal of amino groups from amino acids

16. The effect of high levels of ADP is to in cellular respiration.

a. increase the activity of specific enzymes b. decrease the activity of specific enzymes c. have no effect on the activity of specific enzymes d. slow down the pathway

17. The control of which enzyme exerts the most control on glycolysis?

a. hexokinase   
b. phosphofructokinase c. glucose-6-phosphatase d. aldolase

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

18. Why is it beneficial for cells to use ATP rather than energy directly from the bonds of carbohydrates? What are the greatest drawbacks to harnessing energy directly from the bonds of several different compounds?   
19. Nearly all organisms on Earth carry out some form of glycolysis. How does this fact support or not support the assertion that glycolysis is one of the oldest metabolic pathways?   
20. Because they lose their mitochondria during development, red blood cells cannot perform aerobic respiration; however, they do perform glycolysis in the cytoplasm. Why do all cells need an energy source, and what would happen if glycolysis were blocked in a red blood cell?   
21. What is the primary difference between a circular pathway and a linear pathway?   
22. How do the roles of ubiquinone and cytochrome c differ from the roles of the other components of the electron transport chain?   
23. What accounts for the different number of ATP molecules that are formed through cellular respiration?   
24. What is the primary difference between fermentation and anaerobic respiration?   
25. Would you describe metabolic pathways as inherently wasteful or inherently economical? Why?   
26. How does citrate from the citric acid cycle affect glycolysis?   
27. Why might negative feedback mechanisms be more common than positive feedback mechanisms in living cells?