29.8 The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain the concept of particle-wave duality, and its scope.

Particle-wave duality—the fact that all particles have wave properties—is one of the cornerstones of quantum mechanics. We first came across it in the treatment of photons, those particles of EM radiation that exhibit both particle and wave properties, but not at the same time. Later it was noted that particles of matter have wave properties as well. The dual properties of particles and waves are found for all particles, whether massless like photons, or having a mass like electrons. (See Figure 29.24.)

There are many submicroscopic particles in nature. Most have mass and are expected to act as particles, or the smallest units of matter. All these masses have wave properties, with wavelengths given by the de Broglie relationship  . So, too, do combinations of these particles, such as nuclei, atoms, and molecules. As a combination of masses becomes large, particularly if it is large enough to be called macroscopic, its wave nature becomes difficult to observe. This is consistent with our common experience with matter.

Some particles in nature are massless. We have only treated the photon so far, but all massless entities travel at the speed of light, have a wavelength, and exhibit particle and wave behaviors. They have momentum given by a rearrangement of the de Broglie relationship,  . In large combinations of these massless particles (such large combinations are common only for photons or EM waves), there is mostly wave behavior upon detection, and the particle nature becomes difficult to observe. This is also consistent with experience. (See Figure 29.25.)

The particle-wave duality is a universal attribute. It is another connection between matter and energy. Not only has modern physics been able to describe nature for high speeds and small sizes, it has also discovered new connections and symmetries. There is greater unity and symmetry in nature than was known in the classical era—but they were dreamt of. A beautiful poem written by the English poet William Blake some two centuries ago contains the following four lines:

To see the World in a Grain of Sand And a Heaven in a Wild Flower Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand And Eternity in an hour

Integrated Concepts

The problem set for this section involves concepts from this chapter and several others. Physics is most interesting when applied to general situations involving more than a narrow set of physical principles. For example, photons have momentum, hence the relevance of Linear Momentum and Collisions. The following topics are involved in some or all of the problems in this section:

Dynamics: Newton’s Laws of Motion Work, Energy, and Energy Resources Linear Momentum and Collisions Heat and Heat Transfer Methods

Electric Potential and Electric Field   
Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm’s Law   
Wave Optics   
Special Relativity

Problem-Solving Strategy

1. Identify which physical principles are involved.   
2. Solve the problem using strategies outlined in the text.

Example 29.10 illustrates how these strategies are applied to an integrated-concept problem.

EXAMPLE 29.10

Recoil of a Dust Particle after Absorbing a Photon

The following topics are involved in this integrated concepts worked example:

A 550-nm photon (visible light) is absorbed by a  particle of dust in outer space. (a) Find the momentum of such a photon. (b) What is the recoil velocity of the particle of dust, assuming it is initially at rest?

Strategy Step 1

To solve an integrated-conceptproblem, such as those following this example, we must first identify the physical principles involved and identify the chapters in which they are found. Part (a) of this example asks for the momentumofaphoton, a topic of the present chapter. Part (b) considers recoilfolowingacolision, a topic of Linear Momentum and Collisions.

Strategy Step 2

The following solutions to each part of the example illustrate how specific problem-solving strategies are applied.   
These involve identifying knowns and unknowns, checking to see if the answer is reasonable, and so on.

Solution for (a)

The momentum of a photon is related to its wavelength by the equation:

Entering the known value for Planck’s constant  and given the wavelength  , we obtain

Discussion for (a)

This momentum is small, as expected from discussions in the text and the fact that photons of visible light carry small amounts of energy and momentum compared with those carried by macroscopic objects.

Solution for (b)

Conservation of momentum in the absorption of this photon by a grain of dust can be analyzed using the equation:

The net external force is zero, since the dust is in outer space. Let 1 represent the photon and 2 the dust particle. Before the collision, the dust is at rest (relative to some observer); after the collision, there is no photon (it is absorbed). So conservation of momentum can be written

where  is the photon momentum before the collision and  is the dust momentum after the collision. The mass and recoil velocity of the dust are  and  , respectively. Solving this for  , the requested quantity, yields

where  is the photon momentum found in part (a). Entering known values (noting that a microgram is  gives

Discussion

The recoil velocity of the particle of dust is extremely small. As we have noted, however, there are immense numbers of photons in sunlight and other macroscopic sources. In time, collisions and absorption of many photons could cause a significant recoil of the dust, as observed in comet tails.

Glossary

atomic spectra the electromagnetic emission from atoms and molecules   
binding energy also called the workfunction; the amount of energy necessary to eject an electron from a material   
blackbody an ideal radiator, which can radiate equally well at all wavelengths   
blackbody radiation the electromagnetic radiation from a blackbody   
bremsstrahlung German for brakingradiation; produced when electrons are decelerated   
characteristic x rays x rays whose energy depends on the material they were produced in   
Compton effect the phenomenon whereby x rays scattered from materials have decreased energy   
correspondence principle in the classical limit (large, slow-moving objects), quantum mechanics becomes the same as classical physics   
de Broglie wavelength the wavelength possessed by a particle of matter, calculated by    
gamma ray also  -ray; highest-energy photon in the EM spectrum   
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle a fundamental limit to the precision with which pairs of quantities (momentum and position, and energy and time) can be measured   
infrared radiation photons with energies slightly less than red light   
ionizing radiation radiation that ionizes materials that absorb it   
microwaves photons with wavelengths on the order of a micron    
particle-wave duality the property of behaving like either a particle or a wave; the term for the phenomenon that all particles have wave characteristics   
photoelectric effect the phenomenon whereby some

materials eject electrons when light is shined on them photon a quantum, or particle, of electromagnetic radiation photon energy the amount of energy a photon has;  photon momentum the amount of momentum a photon has, calculated by  Planck’s constant  probability distribution the overall spatial distribution of probabilities to find a particle at a given location quantized the fact that certain physical entities exist only with particular discrete values and not every conceivable value quantum mechanics the branch of physics that deals with small objects and with the quantization of various entities, especially energy ultraviolet radiation UV; ionizing photons slightly more energetic than violet light uncertainty in energy lack of precision or lack of knowledge of precise results in measurements of energy uncertainty in momentum lack of precision or lack of knowledge of precise results in measurements of momentum uncertainty in position lack of precision or lack of knowledge of precise results in measurements of position uncertainty in time lack of precision or lack of knowledge of precise results in measurements of time visible light the range of photon energies the human eye can detect x ray EM photon between -ray and UV in energy

Section Summary

29.1 Quantization of Energy

• The first indication that energy is sometimes quantized came from blackbody radiation, which is the emission of EM radiation by an object with an emissivity of 1.   
• Planck recognized that the energy levels of the emitting atoms and molecules were quantized, with only the allowed values of  where  is any non-negative integer  .   
•  is Planck’s constant, whose value is    
Thus, the oscillatory absorption and emission

energies of atoms and molecules in a blackbody could increase or decrease only in steps of size  where  is the frequency of the oscillatory nature of the absorption and emission of EM radiation. • Another indication of energy levels being quantized in atoms and molecules comes from the lines in atomic spectra, which are the EM emissions of individual atoms and molecules.

29.2 The Photoelectric Effect

• The photoelectric effect is the process in which EM

radiation ejects electrons from a material.   
• Einstein proposed photons to be quanta of EM radiation having energy  , where  is the frequency of the radiation. All EM radiation is composed of photons. As Einstein explained, all characteristics of the photoelectric effect are due to the interaction of individual photons with individual electrons.   
• The maximum kinetic energy  of ejected electrons (photoelectrons) is given by  , where  is the photon energy and BE is the binding energy (or work function) of the electron to the particular material.

29.3 Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum

• Photon energy is responsible for many characteristics of EM radiation, being particularly noticeable at high frequencies. • Photons have both wave and particle characteristics.

29.4 Photon Momentum

• Photons have momentum, given by  , where  is the photon wavelength. • Photon energy and momentum are related by  , where for a photon.

29.5 The Particle-Wave Duality

EM radiation can behave like either a particle or a wave. This is termed particle-wave duality.

29.6 The Wave Nature of Matter

• Particles of matter also have a wavelength, called

Conceptual Questions

the de Broglie wavelength, given by  , where  is momentum. Matter is found to have the same interference characteristicsas any other wave.

29.7 Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle

• Matter is found to have the same interference characteristics as any other wave.   
• There is now a probability distribution for the location of a particle rather than a definite position.   
• Another consequence of the wave character of all particles is the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which limits the precision with which certain physical quantities can be known simultaneously. For position and momentum, the uncertainty principle is  , where  is the uncertainty in position and  is the uncertainty in momentum. For energy and time, the uncertainty principle is △E△t≥ where  is the uncertainty in energy and  is the uncertainty in time. These small limits are fundamentally important on the quantum-mechanical scale.

29.8 The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed

• The particle-wave duality refers to the fact that all particles—those with mass and those without mass—have wave characteristics. • This is a further connection between mass and energy.

29.1 Quantization of Energy

1. Give an example of a physical entity that is quantized. State specifically what the entity is and what the limits are on its values.   
2. Give an example of a physical entity that is not quantized, in that it is continuous and may have a continuous range of values.   
3. What aspect of the blackbody spectrum forced Planck to propose quantization of energy levels in its atoms and molecules?   
4. If Planck’s constant were large, say  times greater than it is, we would observe macroscopic entities to be quantized. Describe the motions of a child’s swing under such circumstances.

5. Why don’t we notice quantization in everyday events?

29.2 The Photoelectric Effect

6. Is visible light the only type of EM radiation that can cause the photoelectric effect?   
7. Which aspects of the photoelectric effect cannot be explained without photons? Which can be explained without photons? Are the latter inconsistent with the existence of photons?   
8. Is the photoelectric effect a direct consequence of the wave character of EM radiation or of the particle character of EM radiation? Explain briefly.   
9. Insulators (nonmetals) have a higher BE than metals, and it is more difficult for photons to eject electrons from insulators. Discuss how this relates to the free charges in metals that make them good conductors.   
10. If you pick up and shake a piece of metal that has electrons in it free to move as a current, no electrons fall out. Yet if you heat the metal, electrons can be boiled off. Explain both of these facts as they relate to the amount and distribution of energy involved with shaking the object as compared with heating it.

29.3 Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum

11. Why are UV,  rays, and rays called ionizing radiation?   
12. How can treating food with ionizing radiation help keep it from spoiling? UV is not very penetrating. What else could be used?   
13. Some television tubes are CRTs. They use an approximately  accelerating potential to send electrons to the screen, where the electrons stimulate phosphors to emit the light that forms the pictures we watch. Would you expect x rays also to be created?   
14. Tanning salons use “safe” UV with a longer wavelength than some of the UV in sunlight. This “safe” UV has enough photon energy to trigger the tanning mechanism. Is it likely to be able to cause cell damage and induce cancer with prolonged exposure?   
15. Your pupils dilate when visible light intensity is reduced. Does wearing sunglasses that lack UV blockers increase or decrease the UV hazard to your eyes? Explain.   
16. One could feel heat transfer in the form of infrared radiation from a large nuclear bomb detonated in the atmosphere  from you. However, none of the profusely emitted  rays or rays reaches you. Explain.   
17. Can a single microwave photon cause cell damage? Explain.   
18. In an  -ray tube, the maximum photon energy is given by  Would it be technically more correct to say  where BE is the binding energy of electrons in the target anode? Why isn’t the energy stated the latter way?

29.4 Photon Momentum

19. Which formula may be used for the momentum of all particles, with or without mass?   
20. Is there any measurable difference between the momentum of a photon and the momentum of matter?   
21. Why don’t we feel the momentum of sunlight when we are on the beach?

29.6 The Wave Nature of Matter

22. How does the interference of water waves differ from the interference of electrons? How are they analogous?   
23. Describe one type of evidence for the wave nature of matter.   
24. Describe one type of evidence for the particle nature of EM radiation.

29.7 Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle

25. What is the Heisenberg uncertainty principle? Does it place limits on what can be known?

29.8 The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed

26. In what ways are matter and energy related that were not known before the development of relativity and quantum mechanics?

Problems & Exercises

29.1 Quantization of Energy

1. A LiBr molecule oscillates with a frequency of  (a) What is the difference in energy in eV between allowed oscillator states? (b) What is the approximate value of  for a state having an energy of    
2. The difference in energy between allowed oscillator states in HBr molecules is  . What is the oscillation frequency of this molecule?

3. A physicist is watching a  orangutan at a zoo swing lazily in a tire at the end of a rope. He (the physicist) notices that each oscillation takes 3.00 s and hypothesizes that the energy is quantized. (a) What is the difference in energy in joules between allowed oscillator states? (b) What is the value of  for a state where the energy is 5.00 J? (c) Can the quantization be observed?

29.2 The Photoelectric Effect   
4. What is the longest-wavelength EM radiation that can eject a photoelectron from silver, given that the binding energy is 4.73 eV? Is this in the visible range?   
5. Find the longest-wavelength photon that can eject an electron from potassium, given that the binding energy is  Is this visible EM radiation?   
6. What is the binding energy in eV of electrons in magnesium, if the longest-wavelength photon that can eject electrons is    
7. Calculate the binding energy in eV of electrons in aluminum, if the longest-wavelength photon that can eject them is  .   
8. What is the maximum kinetic energy in eV of electrons ejected from sodium metal by 450-nm EM radiation, given that the binding energy is 2.28 eV?   
9. UV radiation having a wavelength of  falls on gold metal, to which electrons are bound by 4.82 eV. What is the maximum kinetic energy of the ejected photoelectrons?   
10. Violet light of wavelength 400 nm ejects electrons with a maximum kinetic energy of 0.860 eV from sodium metal. What is the binding energy of electrons to sodium metal?   
11. UV radiation having a 300-nm wavelength falls on uranium metal, ejecting 0.500-eV electrons. What is the binding energy of electrons to uranium metal?   
12. What is the wavelength of EM radiation that ejects 2.00-eV electrons from calcium metal, given that the binding energy is 2.71 eV? What type of EM radiation is this?   
13. Find the wavelength of photons that eject 0.100-eV electrons from potassium, given that the binding energy is 2.24 eV. Are these photons visible?   
14. What is the maximum velocity of electrons ejected from a material by 80-nm photons, if they are bound to the material by 4.73 eV?   
15. Photoelectrons from a material with a binding energy of  are ejected by 420-nm photons. Once ejected, how long does it take these electrons to travel 2.50 cm to a detection device?   
16. A laser with a power output of  at a wavelength of 400 nm is projected onto calcium metal. (a) How many electrons per second are ejected? (b) What power is carried away by the electrons, given that the binding energy is 2.71 eV?

17. (a) Calculate the number of photoelectrons per second ejected from a  area of sodium metal by 500-nm EM radiation having an intensity of  (the intensity of sunlight above the Earth’s atmosphere). (b) Given that the binding energy is  what power is carried away by the electrons? (c) The electrons carry away less power than brought in by the photons. Where does the other power go? How can it be recovered?

18. Unreasonable Results Red light having a wavelength of  is projected onto magnesium metal to which electrons are bound by  (a) Use  to calculate the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons. (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?

19. Unreasonable Results (a) What is the binding energy of electrons to a material from which 4.00-eV electrons are ejected by 400-nm EM radiation? (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?

29.3 Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum

20. What is the energy in joules and eV of a photon in a radio wave from an AM station that has a 1530-kHz broadcast frequency?   
21. (a) Find the energy in joules and eV of photons in radio waves from an FM station that has a 90.0-MHz broadcast frequency. (b) What does this imply about the number of photons per second that the radio station must broadcast?   
22. Calculate the frequency in hertz of a 1.00-MeV -ray photon.   
23. (a) What is the wavelength of a 1.00-eV photon? (b) Find its frequency in hertz. (c) Identify the type of EM radiation.   
24. Do the unit conversions necessary to show that  as stated in the text.   
25. Confirm the statement in the text that the range of photon energies for visible light is 1.63 to 3.26 eV, given that the range of visible wavelengths is 380 to  .

26. (a) Calculate the energy in  of an IR photon of frequency  (b) How many of these photons would need to be absorbed simultaneously by a tightly bound molecule to break it apart? (c) What is the energy in eV of a ray of frequency  (d) How many tightly bound molecules could a single such ray break apart?

27. Prove that, to three-digit accuracy,  as stated in the text.   
28. (a) What is the maximum energy in eV of photons produced in a CRT using a  accelerating potential, such as a color TV? (b) What is their frequency?   
29. What is the accelerating voltage of an x-ray tube that produces x rays with a shortest wavelength of 0.0103 nm?   
30. (a) What is the ratio of power outputs by two microwave ovens having frequencies of 950 and  , if they emit the same number of photons per second? (b) What is the ratio of photons per second if they have the same power output?   
31. How many photons per second are emitted by the antenna of a microwave oven, if its power output is  at a frequency of 2560 MHz?   
32. Some satellites use nuclear power. (a) If such a satellite emits a 1.00-W flux of rays having an average energy of  , how many are emitted per second? (b) These rays affect other satellites. How far away must another satellite be to only receive one ray per second per square meter?   
33. (a) If the power output of a 650-kHz radio station is  , how many photons per second are produced? (b) If the radio waves are broadcast uniformly in all directions, find the number of photons per second per square meter at a distance of  . Assume no reflection from the ground or absorption by the air.   
34. How many x-ray photons per second are created by an x-ray tube that produces a flux of x rays having a power of 1.00 W? Assume the average energy per photon is  .   
35. (a) How far away must you be from a  radio station with power  for there to be only one photon per second per square meter? Assume no reflections or absorption, as if you were in deep outer space. (b) Discuss the implications for detecting intelligent life in other solar systems by detecting their radio broadcasts.   
36. Assuming that  of a 100-W light bulb’s energy output is in the visible range (typical for incandescent bulbs) with an average wavelength of  , and that the photons spread out uniformly and are not absorbed by the atmosphere, how far away would you be if 500 photons per second enter the  diameter pupil of your eye? (This number easily stimulates the retina.)   
37. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a laser pen. Construct a problem in which you calculate the number of photons per second emitted by the pen. Among the things to be considered are the laser pen’s wavelength and power output. Your instructor may also wish for you to determine the minimum diffraction spreading in the beam and the number of photons per square centimeter the pen can project at some large distance. In this latter case, you will also need to consider the output size of the laser beam, the distance to the object being illuminated, and any absorption or scattering along the way.

29.4 Photon Momentum

38. (a) Find the momentum of a 4.00-cm-wavelength microwave photon. (b) Discuss why you expect the answer to (a) to be very small.   
39. (a) What is the momentum of a 0.0100-nmwavelength photon that could detect details of an atom? (b) What is its energy in MeV?   
40. (a) What is the wavelength of a photon that has a momentum of  (b) Find its energy in eV.   
41. (a)  -ray photon has a momentum of  . What is its wavelength? (b) Calculate its energy in MeV.   
42. (a) Calculate the momentum of a photon having a wavelength of  . (b) Find the velocity of an electron having the same momentum. (c) What is the kinetic energy of the electron, and how does it compare with that of the photon?   
43. Repeat the previous problem for a  - wavelength photon.   
44. (a) Calculate the wavelength of a photon that has the same momentum as a proton moving at  of the speed of light. (b) What is the energy of the photon in MeV? (c) What is the kinetic energy of the proton in MeV?   
45. (a) Find the momentum of a 100-keV x-ray photon. (b) Find the equivalent velocity of a neutron with the same momentum. (c) What is the neutron’s kinetic energy in keV?

46. Take the ratio of relativistic rest energy,  , to relativistic momentum,  , and show that in the limit that mass approaches zero, you find  .

47. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a space sail such as mentioned in Example 29.5. Construct a problem in which you calculate the light pressure on the sail in  produced by reflecting sunlight. Also calculate the force that could be produced and how much effect that would have on a spacecraft. Among the things to be considered are the intensity of sunlight, its average wavelength, the number of photons per square meter this implies, the area of the space sail, and the mass of the system being accelerated.

48. Unreasonable Results A car feels a small force due to the light it sends out from its headlights, equal to the momentum of the light divided by the time in which it is emitted. (a) Calculate the power of each headlight, if they exert a total force of  backward on the car. (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?

29.6 The Wave Nature of Matter

49. At what velocity will an electron have a wavelength of    
50. What is the wavelength of an electron moving at  of the speed of light?   
51. At what velocity does a proton have a 6.00-fm wavelength (about the size of a nucleus)? Assume the proton is nonrelativistic. (1 femtometer   )   
52. What is the velocity of a  billiard ball if its wavelength is  (large enough for it to interfere with other billiard balls)?   
53. Find the wavelength of a proton moving at  of the speed of light.   
54. Experiments are performed with ultracold neutrons having velocities as small as  (a) What is the wavelength of such a neutron? (b) What is its kinetic energy in eV?   
55. (a) Find the velocity of a neutron that has a 6.00-fm wavelength (about the size of a nucleus). Assume the neutron is nonrelativistic. (b) What is the neutron’s kinetic energy in MeV?   
56. What is the wavelength of an electron accelerated through a  potential, as in a TV tube?   
57. What is the kinetic energy of an electron in a TEM having a 0.0100-nm wavelength?   
58. (a) Calculate the velocity of an electron that has a wavelength of  (b) Through what voltage must the electron be accelerated to have this velocity?   
59. The velocity of a proton emerging from a Van de Graaff accelerator is  of the speed of light. (a) What is the proton’s wavelength? (b) What is its kinetic energy, assuming it is nonrelativistic? (c) What was the equivalent voltage through which it was accelerated?   
60. The kinetic energy of an electron accelerated in an x-ray tube is  Assuming it is nonrelativistic, what is its wavelength?   
61. Unreasonable Results (a) Assuming it is nonrelativistic, calculate the velocity of an electron with a 0.100-fm wavelength (small enough to detect details of a nucleus). (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?

29.7 Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle

62. (a) If the position of an electron in a membrane is measured to an accuracy of  , what is the electron’s minimum uncertainty in velocity? (b) If the electron has this velocity, what is its kinetic energy in eV? (c) What are the implications of this energy, comparing it to typical molecular binding energies?   
63. (a) If the position of a chlorine ion in a membrane is measured to an accuracy of  , what is its minimum uncertainty in velocity, given its mass is  (b) If the ion has this velocity, what is its kinetic energy in eV, and how does this compare with typical molecular binding energies?   
64. Suppose the velocity of an electron in an atom is known to an accuracy of  (reasonably accurate compared with orbital velocities). What is the electron’s minimum uncertainty in position, and how does this compare with the approximate 0.1-nm size of the atom?   
65. The velocity of a proton in an accelerator is known to an accuracy of  of the speed of light. (This could be small compared with its velocity.) What is the smallest possible uncertainty in its position?   
66. A relatively long-lived excited state of an atom has a lifetime of  . What is the minimum uncertainty in its energy?   
67. (a) The lifetime of a highly unstable nucleus is . What is the smallest uncertainty in its decay energy? (b) Compare this with the rest energy of an electron.   
68. The decay energy of a short-lived particle has an uncertainty of  due to its short lifetime. What is the smallest lifetime it can have?   
69. The decay energy of a short-lived nuclear excited state has an uncertainty of  due to its short lifetime. What is the smallest lifetime it can have?   
70. What is the approximate uncertainty in the mass of a muon, as determined from its decay lifetime?   
71. Derive the approximate form of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle for energy and time,  , using the following arguments: Since the position of a particle is uncertain by  , where  is the wavelength of the photon used to examine it, there is an uncertainty in the time the photon takes to traverse  . Furthermore, the photon has an energy related to its wavelength, and it can transfer some or all of this energy to the object being examined. Thus the uncertainty in the energy of the object is also related to . Find  and  ; then multiply them to give the approximate uncertainty principle.

29.8 The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed

72. Integrated Concepts The 54.0-eV electron in Example 29.7 has a 0.167-nm wavelength. If such electrons are passed through a double slit and have their first maximum at an angle of  , what is the slit separation ?

73. Integrated Concepts An electron microscope produces electrons with a 2.00-pm wavelength. If these are passed through a 1.00-nm single slit, at what angle will the first diffraction minimum be found?

74. Integrated Concepts A certain heat lamp emits 200 W of mostly IR radiation averaging  in wavelength. (a) What is the average photon energy in joules? (b) How many of these photons are required to increase the temperature of a person’s shoulder by  , assuming the affected mass is  with a specific heat of  . Also assume no other significant heat transfer. (c) How long does this take?

75. Integrated Concepts On its high power setting, a microwave oven produces 900 W of  microwaves. (a) How many photons per second is this? (b) How many photons are required to increase the temperature of a 0.500-kg mass of pasta by  , assuming a specific heat of  Neglect all other heat transfer. (c) How long must the microwave operator wait for their pasta to be ready?   
76. Integrated Concepts (a) Calculate the amount of microwave energy in joules needed to raise the temperature of  of soup from  to  . (b) What is the total momentum of all the microwave photons it takes to do this? (c) Calculate the velocity of a  mass with the same momentum. (d) What is the kinetic energy of this mass?   
77. Integrated Concepts (a) What is for an electron emerging from the Stanford Linear Accelerator with a total energy of  (b) Find its momentum. (c) What is the electron’s wavelength?   
78. Integrated Concepts (a) What is for a proton having an energy of 1.00 TeV, produced by the Fermilab accelerator? (b) Find its momentum. (c) What is the proton’s wavelength?   
79. Integrated Concepts An electron microscope passes 1.00-pmwavelength electrons through a circular aperture  in diameter. What is the angle between two just-resolvable point sources for this microscope?   
80. Integrated Concepts (a) Calculate the velocity of electrons that form the same pattern as  light when passed through a double slit. (b) Calculate the kinetic energy of each and compare them. (c) Would either be easier to generate than the other? Explain.   
81. Integrated Concepts (a) What is the separation between double slits that produces a second-order minimum at  for 650-nm light? (b) What slit separation is needed to produce the same pattern for  protons.

82. Integrated Concepts

A laser with a power output of  at a wavelength of 400 nm is projected onto calcium metal. (a) How many electrons per second are ejected? (b) What power is carried away by the electrons, given that the binding energy is 2.71 eV? (c) Calculate the current of ejected electrons. (d) If the photoelectric material is electrically insulated and acts like a 2.00-pF capacitor, how long will current flow before the capacitor voltage stops it?

83. Integrated Concepts One problem with x rays is that they are not sensed. Calculate the temperature increase of a researcher exposed in a few seconds to a nearly fatal accidental dose of  rays under the following conditions. The energy of the x-ray photons is 200  , and  of them are absorbed per kilogram of tissue, the specific heat of which is  . (Note that medical diagnostic x-ray machines can otproduce an intensity this great.)

84. Integrated Concepts A 1.00-fm photon has a wavelength short enough to detect some information about nuclei. (a) What is the photon momentum? (b) What is its energy in joules and MeV? (c) What is the (relativistic) velocity of an electron with the same momentum? (d) Calculate the electron’s kinetic energy.

85. Integrated Concepts

The momentum of light is exactly reversed when reflected straight back from a mirror, assuming negligible recoil of the mirror. Thus the change in momentum is twice the photon momentum. Suppose light of intensity  reflects from a mirror of area  . (a) Calculate the energy reflected in  . (b) What is the momentum imparted to the mirror? (c) Using the most general form of Newton’s second law, what is the force on the mirror? (d) Does the assumption of no mirror recoil seem reasonable?

86. Integrated Concepts Sunlight above the Earth’s atmosphere has an intensity of  . If this is reflected straight back from a mirror that has only a small recoil, the light’s momentum is exactly reversed, giving the mirror twice the incident momentum. (a) Calculate the force per square meter of mirror. (b) Very low mass mirrors can be constructed in the near weightlessness of space, and attached to a spaceship to sail it. Once done, the average mass per square meter of the spaceship is 0.100 kg. Find the acceleration of the spaceship if all other forces are balanced. (c) How fast is it moving 24 hours later?

87. Critical Thinking A photon of light with a wavelength of  is involved in a collision with an electron. Use  for Planck’s constant. (a) How much momentum does the photon have before the collision? (b) If the wavelength of the photon leaving the collision is  , how much momentum does the photon have? (c) Does the momentum have to be conserved in every direction? (d) Does a longer wavelength imply more or less momentum than a shorter wavelength?