32.7 Nuclear Weapons

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Discuss different types of fission and thermonuclear bombs.   
• Explain the ill effects of nuclear explosion.

The world was in turmoil when fission was discovered in 1938. The discovery of fission, made by two German physicists, Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassman, was quickly verified by two Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany, Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch. Fermi, among others, soon found that not only did neutrons induce fission; more neutrons were produced during fission. The possibility of a self-sustained chain reaction was immediately recognized by leading scientists the world over. The enormous energy known to be in nuclei, but considered inaccessible, now seemed to be available on a large scale.

Within months after the announcement of the discovery of fission, Adolf Hitler banned the export of uranium from newly occupied Czechoslovakia. It seemed that the military value of uranium had been recognized in Nazi Germany, and that a serious effort to build a nuclear bomb had begun.

Alarmed scientists, many of them who fled Nazi Germany, decided to take action. None was more famous or revered than Einstein. It was felt that his help was needed to get the American government to make a serious effort at nuclear weapons as a matter of survival. Leo Szilard, an escaped Hungarian physicist, took a draft of a letter to Einstein, who, although pacifistic, signed the final version. The letter was for President Franklin Roosevelt, warning of the German potential to build extremely powerful bombs of a new type. It was sent in August of 1939, just before the German invasion of Poland that marked the start of World War II.

It was not until December 6, 1941, the day before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, that the United States made a massive commitment to building a nuclear bomb. The top secret Manhattan Project was a crash program aimed at beating the Germans. It was carried out in remote locations, such as Los Alamos, New Mexico, whenever possible, and eventually came to cost billions of dollars and employ the efforts of more than 100,000 people. J. Robert Oppenheimer (1904–1967), whose talent and ambitions made him ideal, was chosen to head the project. The first major step was made by Enrico Fermi and his group in December 1942, when they achieved the first self-sustained nuclear reactor. This first “atomic pile”, built in a squash court at the University of Chicago, used carbon blocks to thermalize neutrons. It not only proved that the chain reaction was possible, it began the era of nuclear reactors. Glenn Seaborg, an American chemist and physicist, received the Nobel Prize in physics in 1951 for discovery of several transuranic elements, including plutonium. Carbon-moderated reactors are relatively inexpensive and simple in design and are still used for breeding plutonium, such as at Chernobyl, where two such reactors remain in operation.

Plutonium was recognized as easier to fission with neutrons and, hence, a superior fission material very early in the Manhattan Project. Plutonium availability was uncertain, and so a uranium bomb was developed simultaneously. Figure 32.24 shows a gun-type bomb, which takes two subcritical uranium masses and blows them together. To get an appreciable yield, the critical mass must be held together by the explosive charges inside the cannon barrel for a few microseconds. Since the buildup of the uranium chain reaction is relatively slow, the device to hold the critica mass together can be relatively simple. Owing to the fact that the rate of spontaneous fission is low, a neutron source is triggered at the same time the critical mass is assembled.

Plutonium’s special properties necessitated a more sophisticated critical mass assembly, shown schematically in Figure 32.25. A spherical mass of plutonium is surrounded by shape charges (high explosives that release most of their blast in one direction) that implode the plutonium, crushing it into a smaller volume to form a critical mass. The implosion technique is faster and more effective, because it compresses three-dimensionally rather than onedimensionally as in the gun-type bomb. Again, a neutron source must be triggered at just the correct time to initiate the chain reaction.

Owing to its complexity, the plutonium bomb needed to be tested before there could be any attempt to use it. On July 16, 1945, the test named Trinity was conducted in the isolated Alamogordo Desert about 200 miles south of Los Alamos (see Figure 32.26). A new age had begun. The yield of this device was about 10 kilotons (kT), the equivalent of 5000 of the largest conventional bombs.

Although Germany surrendered on May 7, 1945, Japan had been steadfastly refusing to surrender for many months, forcing large casualties. Invasion plans by the Allies estimated a million casualties of their own and untold losses of Japanese lives. The bomb was viewed as a way to end the war. The first was a uranium bomb dropped on Hiroshima on August 6. Its yield of about  destroyed the city and killed an estimated 80,000 people, with 100,000 more being seriously injured (see Figure 32.27). The second was a plutonium bomb dropped on Nagasaki only three days later, on August 9. Its  yield killed at least 50,000 people, something less than Hiroshima because of the hilly terrain and the fact that it was a few kilometers off target. The Japanese were told that one bomb a week would be dropped until they surrendered unconditionally, which they did on August 14. In actuality, the United States had only enough plutonium for one more and as yet unassembled bomb.

Knowing that fusion produces several times more energy per kilogram of fuel than fission, some scientists pushed the idea of a fusion bomb starting very early on. Calling this bomb the Super, they realized that it could have another advantage over fission—high-energy neutrons would aid fusion, while they are ineffective in  fission. Thus the fusion bomb could be virtually unlimited in energy release. The first such bomb was detonated by the United States on October 31, 1952, at Eniwetok Atoll with a yield of 10 megatons (MT), about 670 times that of the fission bomb that destroyed Hiroshima. The USSR followed with a fusion device of their own in August 1953, and a weapons race, beyond the aim of this text to discuss, continued until the end of the Cold War.

Figure 32.28 shows a simple diagram of how a thermonuclear bomb is constructed. A fission bomb is exploded next to fusion fuel in the solid form of lithium deuteride. Before the shock wave blows it apart, rays heat and compress the fuel, and neutrons create tritium through the reaction  . Additional fusion and fission fuels are enclosed in a dense shell of  . The shell reflects some of the neutrons back into the fuel to enhance its fusion, but at high internal temperatures fast neutrons are created that also cause the plentiful and inexpensive to fission, part of what allows thermonuclear bombs to be so large.

The energy yield and the types of energy produced by nuclear bombs can be varied. Energy yields in current arsenals range from about  to  , although the USSR once detonated a 67 MT device. Nuclear bombs differ from conventional explosives in more than size. Figure 32.29 shows the approximate fraction of energy output in various forms for conventional explosives and for two types of nuclear bombs. Nuclear bombs put a much larger fraction of their output into thermal energy than do conventional bombs, which tend to concentrate the energy in blast. Another difference is the immediate and residual radiation energy from nuclear weapons. This can be adjusted to put more energy into radiation (the so-called neutron bomb) so that the bomb can be used to irradiate advancing troops without killing friendly troops with blast and heat.

At its peak in 1986, the combined arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union totaled about 60,000 nuclear warheads. In addition, the British, French, and Chinese each have several hundred bombs of various sizes, and a few other countries have a small number. Nuclear weapons are generally divided into two categories. Strategic nuclear weapons are those intended for military targets, such as bases and missile complexes, and moderate to large cities. There were about 20,000 strategic weapons in 1988. Tactical weapons are intended for use in smaller battles. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War in 1989, most of the 32,000 tactical weapons (including Cruise missiles, artillery shells, land mines, torpedoes, depth charges, and backpacks) have been demobilized, and parts of the strategic weapon systems are being dismantled with warheads and missiles being disassembled. According to the Treaty of Moscow of 2002, Russia and the United States have been required to reduce their strategic nuclear arsenal down to about 2000 warheads each.

A few small countries have built or are capable of building nuclear bombs, as are some terrorist groups. Two things are needed—a minimum level of technical expertise and sufficient fissionable material. The first is easy. Fissionable material is controlled but is also available. There are international agreements and organizations that attempt to control nuclear proliferation, but it is increasingly difficult given the availability of fissionable material and the small amount needed for a crude bomb. The production of fissionable fuel itself is technologically difficult. However, the presence of large amounts of such material worldwide, though in the hands of a few, makes control and

accountability crucial.

Glossary

Anger camera a common medical imaging device that uses a scintillator connected to a series of photomultipliers   
break-even when fusion power produced equals the heating power input   
breeder reactors reactors that are designed specifically to make plutonium   
breeding reaction process that produces    
critical mass minimum amount necessary for selfsustained fission of a given nuclide   
criticality condition in which a chain reaction easily becomes self-sustaining   
fission fragments a daughter nuclei   
food irradiation treatment of food with ionizing radiation   
free radicals ions with unstable oxygen- or hydrogencontaining molecules   
gamma camera another name for an Anger camera   
gray (Gy) the SI unit for radiation dose which is defined to be  rad   
high dose a dose greater than 1 Sv (100 rem)   
hormesis a term used to describe generally favorable biological responses to low exposures of toxins or radiation   
ignition when a fusion reaction produces enough energy to be self-sustaining after external energy input is cut off   
inertial confinement a technique that aims multiple lasers at tiny fuel pellets evaporating and crushing them to high density   
linear hypothesis assumption that risk is directly proportional to risk from high doses   
liquid drop model a model of nucleus (only to understand some of its features) in which nucleons in a nucleus act like atoms in a drop   
low dose a dose less than  (10 rem)   
magnetic confinement a technique in which charged particles are trapped in a small region because of difficulty in crossing magnetic field lines   
moderate dose a dose from 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv (10 to 100 rem)   
neutron-induced fission fission that is initiated after the absorption of neutron   
nuclear fission reaction in which a nucleus splits   
nuclear fusion a reaction in which two nuclei are combined, or fused, to form a larger nucleus   
positron emission tomography (PET) tomography technique that uses  emitters and detects the two annihilation rays, aiding in source localization   
proton-proton cycle the combined reactions  ,  and    
quality factor same as relative biological effectiveness   
rad the ionizing energy deposited per kilogram of tissue   
radiolytic products compounds produced due to chemical reactions of free radicals   
radiopharmaceutical compound used for medical imaging   
radiotherapy the use of ionizing radiation to treat ailments   
relative biological effectiveness (RBE) a number that expresses the relative amount of damage that a fixed amount of ionizing radiation of a given type can inflict on biological tissues   
roentgen equivalent man (rem) a dose unit more closely related to effects in biological tissue   
shielding a technique to limit radiation exposure   
sievert the SI equivalent of the rem   
single-photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT) tomography performed with -emitting radiopharmaceuticals   
supercriticality an exponential increase in fissions   
tagged process of attaching a radioactive substance to a chemical compound   
therapeutic ratio the ratio of abnormal cells killed to normal cells killed

Section Summary

32.1 Diagnostics and Medical Imaging

• Radiopharmaceuticals are compounds that are used for medical imaging and therapeutics.   
• The process of attaching a radioactive substance is called tagging.   
• Table 32.1 lists certain diagnostic uses of radiopharmaceuticals including the isotope and activity typically used in diagnostics.   
• One common imaging device is the Anger camera, which consists of a lead collimator, radiation detectors, and an analysis computer.   
• Tomography performed with -emitting radiopharmaceuticals is called SPECT and has the advantages of x-ray CT scans coupled with organand function-specific drugs.   
• PET is a similar technique that uses  emitters and detects the two annihilation rays, which aid to localize the source.

32.2 Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation

• The biological effects of ionizing radiation are due to two effects it has on cells: interference with cell reproduction, and destruction of cell function.   
• A radiation dose unit called the rad is defined in terms of the ionizing energy deposited per kilogram of tissue:    
• The SI unit for radiation dose is the gray (Gy), which is defined to be  rad.   
• To account for the effect of the type of particle creating the ionization, we use the relative biological effectiveness (RBE) or quality factor (QF) given in Table 32.2 and define a unit called the roentgen equivalent man (rem) as    
• Particles that have short ranges or create large ionization densities have RBEs greater than unity. The SI equivalent of the rem is the sievert (Sv), defined to be  and  rem.   
Whole-body, single-exposure doses of 0.1 Sv or less are low doses while those of 0.1 to 1 Sv are moderate, and those over 1 Sv are high doses. Some immediate radiation effects are given in Table 32.4. Effects due to low doses are not observed, but their risk is assumed to be directly proportional to those of high doses, an assumption known as the linear hypothesis. Long-term effects are cancer deaths at the rate of  and genetic defects at roughly one-third this rate. Background radiation doses and sources are given in Table 32.5. World-wide average radiation exposure from natural sources, including radon, is about  , or 300 mrem. Radiation protection utilizes shielding, distance, and time to limit exposure.

32.3 Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation

• Radiotherapy is the use of ionizing radiation to treat ailments, now limited to cancer therapy.   
• The sensitivity of cancer cells to radiation enhances the ratio of cancer cells killed to normal cells killed, which is called the therapeutic ratio.   
• Doses for various organs are limited by the tolerance of normal tissue for radiation. Treatment is localized in one region of the body and spread out in time.

32.4 Food Irradiation

• Food irradiation is the treatment of food with ionizing radiation.

• Irradiating food can destroy insects and bacteria by creating free radicals and radiolytic products that can break apart cell membranes.   
• Food irradiation has produced no observable negative short-term effects for humans, but its long-term effects are unknown.

32.5 Fusion

• Nuclear fusion is a reaction in which two nuclei are combined to form a larger nucleus. It releases energy when light nuclei are fused to form medium-mass nuclei.   
• Fusion is the source of energy in stars, with the proton-proton cycle,  being the principal sequence of energy-producing reactions in our Sun. The overall effect of the proton-proton cycle is   ， where the  includes the energy of the positrons emitted and annihilated. Attempts to utilize controlled fusion as an energy source on Earth are related to deuterium and tritium, and the reactions play important roles. Ignition is the condition under which controlled fusion is self-sustaining; it has not yet been achieved. Break-even, in which the fusion energy output is as great as the external energy input, has nearly been achieved.   
• Magnetic confinement and inertial confinement are the two methods being developed for heating fuel to sufficiently high temperatures, at sufficient density, and for sufficiently long times to achieve ignition. The first method uses magnetic fields and the second method uses the momentum of impinging laser beams for confinement.

32.6 Fission

• Nuclear fission is a reaction in which a nucleus is split.   
• Fission releases energy when heavy nuclei are split into medium-mass nuclei.   
• Self-sustained fission is possible, because neutron-induced fission also produces neutrons that can induce other fissions,  , where  and  are the two daughter nuclei, or fission fragments, and  is the number of neutrons produced. A minimum mass, called the critical mass, should be present to achieve criticality.

• More than a critical mass can produce supercriticality. • The production of new or different isotopes (especially  ) by nuclear transformation is called breeding, and reactors designed for this purpose are called breeder reactors.

32.7 Nuclear Weapons

• There are two types of nuclear weapons—fission bombs use fission alone, whereas thermonuclear

bombs use fission to ignite fusion.   
• Both types of weapons produce huge numbers of nuclear reactions in a very short time.   
• Energy yields are measured in kilotons or megatons of equivalent conventional explosives and range from  to more than 20 MT.   
• Nuclear bombs are characterized by far more thermal output and nuclear radiation output than conventional explosives.

Conceptual Questions

32.1 Diagnostics and Medical Imaging

1. In terms of radiation dose, what is the major difference between medical diagnostic uses of radiation and medical therapeutic uses?   
2. One of the methods used to limit radiation dose to the patient in medical imaging is to employ isotopes with short half-lives. How would this limit the dose?

32.2 Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation

3. Isotopes that emit  radiation are relatively safe outside the body and exceptionally hazardous inside. Yet those that emit radiation are hazardous outside and inside. Explain why.   
4. Why is radon more closely associated with inducing lung cancer than other types of cancer?   
5. The RBE for low-energy  is 1.7, whereas that for higher-energy s is only 1. Explain why, considering how the range of radiation depends on its energy.

6. Which methods of radiation protection were used in the device shown in the first photo in Figure 32.30? Which were used in the situation shown in the second photo?

7. What radioisotope could be a problem in homes built of cinder blocks made from uranium mine tailings? (This is true of homes and schools in certain regions near uranium mines.)   
8. Are some types of cancer more sensitive to radiation than others? If so, what makes them more sensitive?

9. Suppose a person swallows some radioactive material by accident. What information is needed to be able to assess possible damage?

32.3 Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation

10. Radiotherapy is more likely to be used to treat cancer in elderly patients than in young ones. Explain why. Why is radiotherapy used to treat young people at all?

32.4 Food Irradiation

11. Does food irradiation leave the food radioactive? To what extent is the food altered chemically for low and high doses in food irradiation?   
12. Compare a low dose of radiation to a human with a low dose of radiation used in food treatment.   
13. Suppose one food irradiation plant uses a  source while another uses an equal activity of . Assuming equal fractions of the rays from the sources are absorbed, why is more time needed to get the same dose using the source?

32.5 Fusion

14. Why does the fusion of light nuclei into heavier nuclei release energy?   
15. Energy input is required to fuse medium-mass nuclei, such as iron or cobalt, into more massive nuclei. Explain why.   
16. In considering potential fusion reactions, what is the advantage of the reaction over the reaction    
17. Give reasons justifying the contention made in the text that energy from the fusion reaction is relatively difficult to capture and utilize.

32.6 Fission

18. Explain why the fission of heavy nuclei releases energy. Similarly, why is it that energy input is required to fission light nuclei?   
19. Explain, in terms of conservation of momentum and energy, why collisions of neutrons with protons will thermalize neutrons better than collisions with oxygen.   
20. The ruins of the Chernobyl reactor are enclosed in a huge concrete structure built around it after the accident. Some rain penetrates the building in winter, and radioactivity from the building increases. What does this imply is happening inside?   
21. Since the uranium or plutonium nucleus fissions into several fission fragments whose mass distribution covers a wide range of pieces, would you expect more residual radioactivity from fission than fusion? Explain.   
22. The core of a nuclear reactor generates a large amount of thermal energy from the decay of fission products, even when the power-producing fission chain reaction is turned off. Would this residual heat be greatest after the reactor has run for a long time or short time? What if the reactor has been shut down for months?   
23. How can a nuclear reactor contain many critical masses and not go supercritical? What methods are used to control the fission in the reactor?   
24. Why can heavy nuclei with odd numbers of neutrons be induced to fission with thermal neutrons, whereas those with even numbers of neutrons require more energy input to induce fission?   
25. Why is a conventional fission nuclear reactor not able to explode as a bomb?

32.7 Nuclear Weapons

26. What are some of the reasons that plutonium rather than uranium is used in all fission bombs and as the trigger in all fusion bombs?   
27. Use the laws of conservation of momentum and energy to explain how a shape charge can direct most of the energy released in an explosion in a specific direction. (Note that this is similar to the situation in guns and cannons—most of the energy goes into the bullet.)   
28. How does the lithium deuteride in the thermonuclear bomb shown in Figure 32.28 supply tritium  as well as deuterium    
29. Fallout from nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere is mainly  and  , which have 28.6- and 32.2-y half-lives, respectively. Atmospheric tests were terminated in most countries in 1963, although China only did so in 1980. It has been found that environmental activities of these two isotopes are decreasing faster than their half-lives. Why might this be?

Problems & Exercises

32.1 Diagnostics and Medical Imaging 32.2 Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation

1. A neutron generator uses an  source, such as radium, to bombard beryllium, inducing the reaction  . Such neutron sources are called RaBe sources, or PuBe sources if they use plutonium to get the  s. Calculate the energy output of the reaction in MeV.   
2. Neutrons from a source (perhaps the one discussed in the preceding problem) bombard natural molybdenum, which is 24 percent  . What is the energy output of the reaction  The mass of  is given in Appendix A: Atomic Masses, and that of is 98.907711 u.   
3. The purpose of producing  (usually by neutron activation of natural molybdenum, as in the preceding problem) is to produce  Using the rules, verify that the  decay of  produces . (Most nuclei produced in this decay are left in a metastable excited state denoted .)   
4. (a) Two annihilation rays in a PET scan originate at the same point and travel to detectors on either side of the patient. If the point of origin is  closer to one of the detectors, what is the difference in arrival times of the photons? (This could be used to give position information, but the time difference is small enough to make it difficult.) (b) How accurately would you need to be able to measure arrival time differences to get a position resolution of    
5. Table 32.1 indicates that  of is used in a brain scan. What is the mass of technetium?   
6. The activities of and  used in thyroid scans are given in Table 32.1 to be 50 and  , respectively. Find and compare the masses of  and in such scans, given their respective halflives are 8.04 d and  . The masses are so small that the radioiodine is usually mixed with stable iodine as a carrier to ensure normal chemistry and distribution in the body.   
7. (a) Neutron activation of sodium, which is  , produces  , which is used in some heart scans, as seen in Table 32.1. The equation for the reaction is  Find its energy output, given the mass of  is  . (b) What mass of  produces the needed  activity, given its half-life is 15.0 h?   
8. What is the dose in mSv for: (a) a 0.1 Gy x-ray? (b)  of neutron exposure to the eye? (c) 1.5 mGy of  exposure?   
9. Find the radiation dose in Gy for: (a) A 10-mSv fluoroscopic x-ray series. (b)  of skin exposure by an  emitter. (c)  of  and rays from the  in your body.   
10. How many Gy of exposure is needed to give a cancerous tumor a dose of  if it is exposed to  activity?   
11. What is the dose in Sv in a cancer treatment that exposes the patient to 200 Gy of rays?   
12. One half the rays from  are absorbed by a  -thick lead shielding. Half of the rays that pass through the first layer of lead are absorbed in a second layer of equal thickness. What thickness of lead will absorb all but one in 1000 of these rays?   
13. A plumber at a nuclear power plant receives a whole-body dose of  in 15 minutes while repairing a crucial valve. Find the radiationinduced yearly risk of death from cancer and the chance of genetic defect from this maximum allowable exposure.   
14. In the 1980s, the term picowave was used to describe food irradiation in order to overcome public resistance by playing on the well-known safety of microwave radiation. Find the energy in MeV of a photon having a wavelength of a picometer.   
15. Find the mass of  that has an activity of  .

32.3 Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation

16. A beam of 168-MeV nitrogen nuclei is used for cancer therapy. If this beam is directed onto a  tumor and gives it a 2.00-Sv dose, how many nitrogen nuclei were stopped? (Use an RBE of 20 for heavy ions.)   
17. (a) If the average molecular mass of compounds in food is  how many molecules are there in  of food? (b) How many ion pairs are created in  of food, if it is exposed to 1000 Sv and it takes  to create an ion pair? (c) Find the ratio of ion pairs to molecules. (d) If these ion pairs recombine into a distribution of 2000 new compounds, how many parts per billion is each?

18. Calculate the dose in Sv to the chest of a patient given an x-ray under the following conditions. The x-ray beam intensity is  , the area of the chest exposed is  ,  of the  -rays are absorbed in  of tissue, and the exposure time is  .

19. (a) A cancer patient is exposed to rays from a 5000-Ci  transillumination unit for  . The rays are collimated in such a manner that only  of them strike the patient. Of those,  are absorbed in a tumor having a mass of  . What is the dose in rem to the tumor, if the average energy per decay is 1.25 MeV? None of the  from the decay reach the patient. (b) Is the dose consistent with stated therapeutic doses?

20. What is the mass of  in a cancer therapy transillumination unit containing  of 

21. Large amounts of  are produced in copper exposed to accelerator beams. While machining contaminated copper, a physicist ingests  of . Each decay emits an average -ray energy of  ,  of which is absorbed in the scientist’s  body. What dose in mSv is caused by this in one day?

22. Naturally occurring  is listed as responsible for 16 mrem/y of background radiation. Calculate the mass of  that must be inside the 55-kg body of a woman to produce this dose. Each  decay emits a 1.32-MeV  , and  of the energy is absorbed inside the body.

23. (a) Background radiation due to  averages only  , but it can range upward depending on where a person lives. Find the mass of  in the  body of a man who receives a dose of  y from it, noting that each  decay emits a 4.80-MeV  particle. You may neglect dose due to daughters and assume a constant amount, evenly distributed due to balanced ingestion and bodily elimination. (b) Is it surprising that such a small mass could cause a measurable radiation dose? Explain.

24. The annual radiation dose from  in our bodies is  . Each  decay emits a  averaging 0.0750 MeV. Taking the fraction of to be  of normal  , and assuming the body is  carbon, estimate the fraction of the decay energy absorbed. (The rest escapes, exposing those close to you.)

25. If everyone in Australia received an extra 0.05 mSv per year of radiation, what would be the increase in the number of cancer deaths per year? (Assume that time had elapsed for the effects to become apparent.) Assume that there are  deaths per Sv of radiation per year. What percent of the actual number of cancer deaths recorded is this?

32.5 Fusion   
26. Verify that the total number of nucleons, total charge, and electron family number are conserved for each of the fusion reactions in the protonproton cycle in  and  (List the value of each of the conserved quantities before and after each of the reactions.)   
27. Calculate the energy output in each of the fusion reactions in the proton-proton cycle, and verify the values given in the above summary.   
28. Show that the total energy released in the protonproton cycle is  , considering the overall effect in  ,  , and  and being certain to include the annihilation energy.   
29. Verify by listing the number of nucleons, total charge, and electron family number before and after the cycle that these quantities are conserved in the overall proton-proton cycle in  .   
30. The energy produced by the fusion of a  mixture of deuterium and tritium was found in Example Calculating Energy and Power from Fusion. Approximately how many kilograms would be required to supply the annual energy use in the United States?   
31. Tritium is naturally rare, but can be produced by the reaction  . How much energy in MeV is released in this neutron capture?   
32. Two fusion reactions mentioned in the text are  and  Both reactions release energy, but the second also creates more fuel. Confirm that the energies produced in the reactions are 20.58 and  respectively. Comment on which product nuclide is most tightly bound,  .

33. (a) Calculate the number of grams of deuterium in an 80,000-L swimming pool, given deuterium is  of natural hydrogen. (b) Find the energy released in joules if this deuterium is fused via the reaction  . (c) Could the neutrons be used to create more energy? (d) Discuss the amount of this type of energy in a swimming pool as compared to that in, say, a gallon of gasoline, also taking into consideration that water is far more abundant.

34. How many kilograms of water are needed to obtain the  of deuterium, assuming that deuterium is  (by number) of natural hydrogen?

35. The power output of the Sun is  . (a) If  of this is supplied by the proton-proton cycle, how many protons are consumed per second? (b) How many neutrinos per second should there be per square meter at the Earth from this process? This huge number is indicative of how rarely a neutrino interacts, since large detectors observe very few per day.

36. Another set of reactions that result in the fusing of hydrogen into helium in the Sun and especially in hotter stars is called the carbon cycle. It is

Write down the overall effect of the carbon cycle (as was done for the proton-proton cycle in  . Note the number of protons  required and assume that the positrons  annihilate electrons to form more rays.

37. (a) Find the total energy released in MeV in each carbon cycle (elaborated in the above problem) including the annihilation energy. (b) How does this compare with the proton-proton cycle output?

38. Verify that the total number of nucleons, total charge, and electron family number are conserved for each of the fusion reactions in the carbon cycle given in the above problem. (List the value of each of the conserved quantities before and after each of the reactions.)

39. Integrated Concepts

The laser system tested for inertial confinement   
can produce a  pulse only 1.00 ns in   
duration. (a) What is the power output of the laser   
system during the brief pulse?   
(b) How many photons are in the pulse, given their   
wavelength is    
(c) What is the total momentum of all these   
photons?   
(d) How does the total photon momentum   
compare with that of a single  deuterium   
nucleus?

40. Integrated Concepts Find the amount of energy given to the  nucleus and to the ray in the reaction  , using the conservation of momentum principle and taking the reactants to be initially at rest. This should confirm the contention that most of the energy goes to the ray.

41. Integrated Concepts (a) What temperature gas would have atoms moving fast enough to bring two  nuclei into contact? Note that, because both are moving, the average kinetic energy only needs to be half the electric potential energy of these doubly charged nuclei when just in contact with one another. (b) Does this high temperature imply practical difficulties for doing this in controlled fusion?

42. Integrated Concepts

(a) Estimate the years that the deuterium fuel in the oceans could supply the energy needs of the world. Assume world energy consumption to be ten times that of the United States which is  and that the deuterium in the oceans could be converted to energy with an efficiency of  . You must estimate or look up the amount of water in the oceans and take the deuterium content to be  of natural hydrogen to find the mass of deuterium available. Note that approximate energy yield of deuterium is  .

(b) Comment on how much time this is by any human measure. (It is not an unreasonable result, only an impressive one.)

32.6 Fission

43. (a) Calculate the energy released in the neutroninduced fission (similar to the spontaneous fission in Example 32.3)  given  and  . (b) This result is about 6 MeV greater than the result for spontaneous fission. Why? (c) Confirm that the total number of nucleons and total charge are conserved in this reaction.

44. (a) Calculate the energy released in the neutroninduced fission reaction  given  and  . (b) Confirm that the total number of nucleons and total charge are conserved in this reaction.

45. (a) Calculate the energy released in the neutroninduced fission reaction  given  and  (b) Confirm that the total number of nucleons and total charge are conserved in this reaction.

46. Confirm that each of the reactions listed for plutonium breeding just following Example 32.4 conserves the total number of nucleons, the total charge, and electron family number.   
47. Breeding plutonium produces energy even before any plutonium is fissioned. (The primary purpose of the four nuclear reactors at Chernobyl was breeding plutonium for weapons. Electrical power was a by-product used by the civilian population.) Calculate the energy produced in each of the reactions listed for plutonium breeding just following Example 32.4. The pertinent masses are  ,  , and 

48. The naturally occurring radioactive isotope  does not make good fission fuel, because it has an even number of neutrons; however, it can be bred into a suitable fuel (much as  is bred into ). (a) What are  and  for  (b) Write the reaction equation for neutron captured by  and identify the nuclide  produced in  . (c) The product nucleus  decays, as does its daughter. Write the decay equations for each, and identify the final nucleus. (d) Confirm that the final nucleus has an odd number of neutrons, making it a better fission fuel. (e) Look up the half-life of the final nucleus to see if it lives long enough to be a useful fuel.

49. The electrical power output of a large nuclear reactor facility is 900 MW. It has a  efficiency in converting nuclear power to electrical. (a) What is the thermal nuclear power output in megawatts? (b) How many  nuclei fission each second, assuming the average fission produces 200 MeV? (c) What mass of  is fissioned in one year of full-power operation?

50. A large power reactor that has been in operation for some months is turned off, but residual activity in the core still produces 150 MW of power. If the average energy per decay of the fission products is 1.00 MeV, what is the core activity in curies?

32.7 Nuclear Weapons

51. Find the mass converted into energy by a 12.0-kT bomb.   
52. What mass is converted into energy by a 1.00-MT bomb?   
53. Fusion bombs use neutrons from their fission trigger to create tritium fuel in the reaction  . What is the energy released by this reaction in MeV?   
54. It is estimated that the total explosive yield of all the nuclear bombs in existence currently is about 4,000 MT. (a) Convert this amount of energy to kilowatthours, noting that  . (b) What would the monetary value of this energy be if it could be converted to electricity costing 10 cents per kW·h?   
55. A radiation-enhanced nuclear weapon (or neutron bomb) can have a smaller total yield and still produce more prompt radiation than a conventional nuclear bomb. This allows the use of neutron bombs to kill nearby advancing enemy forces with radiation without blowing up your own forces with the blast. For a  radiationenhanced weapon and a  conventional nuclear bomb: (a) Compare the blast yields. (b) Compare the prompt radiation yields.   
56. (a) How many  nuclei must fission to produce a  yield, assuming 200 MeV per fission? (b) What is the mass of this much    
57. Assume one-fourth of the yield of a typical 320-kT strategic bomb comes from fission reactions averaging  and the remainder from fusion reactions averaging  . (a) Calculate the number of fissions and the approximate mass of uranium and plutonium fissioned, taking the average atomic mass to be 238. (b) Find the number of fusions and calculate the approximate mass of fusion fuel, assuming an average total atomic mass of the two nuclei in each reaction to be 5. (c) Considering the masses found, does it seem reasonable that some missiles could carry 10 warheads? Discuss, noting that the nuclear fuel is only a part of the mass of a warhead.

58. This problem gives some idea of the magnitude of the energy yield of a small tactical bomb. Assume that half the energy of a  nuclear depth charge set off under an aircraft carrier goes into lifting it out of the water—that is, into gravitational potential energy. How high is the carrier lifted if its mass is 90,000 tons?

59. It is estimated that weapons tests in the atmosphere have deposited approximately 9 MCi of on the surface of the earth. Find the mass of this amount of  .

60. A 1.00-MT bomb exploded a few kilometers above the ground deposits  of its energy into radiant heat. (a) Find the calories per  at a distance of 10.0 km by assuming a uniform distribution over a spherical surface of that radius. (b) If this heat falls on a person’s body, what temperature increase does it cause in the affected tissue, assuming it is absorbed in a layer 1.00-cm deep?

61. Integrated Concepts One scheme to put nuclear weapons to nonmilitary use is to explode them underground in a geologically stable region and extract the geothermal energy for electricity production. There was a total yield of about 4,000 MT in the combined arsenals in 2006. If 1.00 MT per day could be converted to electricity with an efficiency of  : (a) What would the average electrical power output be? (b) How many years would the arsenal last at this rate?

62. Critical Thinking A spherical target in a body is being targeted with  radiation. The target is centered at on a grid that is in centimeters. The target has a radius of 0.500 centimeters. (a) What two points on the  -axis are at the extremes of where the positrons annihilate the electrons? (b) What two points on the  -axis are at the extremes of where the positrons annihilate the electrons? (c) What can be said about the directions of the pair of gamma rays that result from the annihilations? (d) Can the use of  give information in three dimensions?