1.2 Structure of a Typical Desktop Computer

Let us now open the lid of a desktop computer, and see what is inside (shown in Figure 1.2). There are three main parts of a typical desktop computer – CPU (Central Processing Unit), Main Memory, and Hard Disk. The CPU is also referred to as the processor or simply machine in common parlance. We will use the terms interchangeably in this book. The CPU is the main part of the computer that takes a program as input, and executes it. It is the brain of the computer. The main memory is used to store data that a program might need during its execution (information store). For example, let us say that we want to recognize all the faces in an image. Then the image will be stored in main memory. There is some limited storage on the processor itself. However, we shall discuss this aspect later. When we turn off the power, the processor and main memory lose all their data. However, the hard disk represents permanent storage. We do not expect to lose our data when we shut down the system. This is because all our programs, data, photos, videos, and documents are safely backed up in the hard disk.

Figure 1.3 shows a simplistic block diagram of the three components. Along with these main components, there are a host of peripheral components that are connected to the computer. For example, the keyboard and mouse are connected to a computer. They take inputs from the user and communicate them to programs running on the processor. Similarly, to show the output of a program, the processor typically sends the output data to a monitor that can graphically display the result. It is also possible to print the result using a printer. Lastly the computer can be connected to other computers through the network. A revised block diagram with all the peripherals is shown in Figure 1.4.

In this book, we will mainly study the processor. The processor has the central responsibility of executing programs, communicating with the main memory, hard disk, and peripherals. It is the only active unit in our entire system. The others are passive and only respond to requests. They do not have any computational capability of their own.