12.1 The Position Vector

This chapter is about “vector functions.” The vector  is constant. The vector  is moving. It is a function of the parameter  , which often represents time. At each time  , the position vector  locates the moving body:

Our example has  ;  ;  . As  varies, these points trace out a curve in space. The parameter  tells when the body passes each point on the curve. The constant vector  is the position vector  at the instant  .

What are the questions to be asked ? Every student of calculus knows the first question: Find the derivative. If something moves, the Navy salutes it and we differentiate it. At each instant, the body moving along the curve has a speed and a direction. This information is contained in another vector function—the velocity vector  which is the derivative of  :

Since i; j; k are fixed vectors, their derivatives are zero. In polar coordinates i and  are replaced by moving vectors. Then the velocity  has more terms from the product rule (Section 12:4).

Two important cases are uniform motion along a line and around a circle. We study those motions in detail  constant on line,  tangent to circle). This section also finds the speed and distanÑce and acceleÑration for any motion  .

Equation (2) is the computing rule for the velocity  . It is not the definition of  , which goes back to basics and does not depend on coordinates:

We repeat:  is a vector so  is a vector so  is a vector. All three vectors are in Figure 12.1  is not a vector!). This figure reveals the key fact about the geometry: The velocity  is tangent to the curve.

The vector  goes from one point on the curve to a nearby point. Dividing by  changes its length, not its direction. That direction lines up with the tangent to the curve, as the points come closer.

This curve swings upward as  increases. When  the velocity is  . The tangent is along the  axis, since the  and  components are zero. When  the velocity is  , and the curve is climbing.

For the shadow on the  plane, drop the  component. Position on the shadow is  . Velocity along the shadow is  . The shadow is a plane curve.

EXAMPLE 2 Uniform motion in a straight line: the velocity vector v is constant. The speed and direction don’t change. The position vector moves with  :

That is the equation of a line in vaector form. Certainly  . The starting point  is given. The velocity  is also given. Separating the  and  components, equation (3) for a line is

The speed along the line is  : The direction of the line is the unit vector  . We have three equations for  , and eliminating  leaves two equations. The parameter  equals  from equation (4). It also equals  and  . So these ratios equal each other, and  is gone:

An example is  . In this case  —the line goes through the origin. Another point on the line is  . Because  is gone, we cannot say when we reach that point and how fast we are going. The equations  give the same line. Without  we can’t know the velocity   .

EXAMPLE 3 Find an equation for the line through  and  .

Solution We have choices!  can go to any point on the line. The velocity  can be any multiple of the vector from  to  . The decision on  controls where we start, and v controls our speed.

The vector from  to  is  . Those numbers 1; 1; 2 come from subtracting 0; 2; 1 from 1; 3; 3. We choose this vector  as a first  , and double it for a second v. We choose the vector  as a first start and  as a second start. Here are two different expressions for the same line—they are  and  :

The vector  gives  ;  ;  . The vector  is at a different point on the same line at the same time:  ;  ;  .

If I pick  in  and  in  , the point is  . We arrive there at different times. You are seeing how parameters work, to tell “where” and also “when.” If  goes from  to  , all points on one line are also on the other line. The path is the same, but the “twins” are going at different speeds.

Question 1 When do these twins meet ? When does  ? Answer They meet at  , when  .

Question 2 What is an equation for the segment between  and  (not beyond) ? Answer In the equation for  , let  go from 0 to 1 (not beyond):

At  we start from  . At  we reach  .

Question 3 What is an equation for the line with out theparameter  ? Answer Solve equations (6) for  or use .5/:  .

Question 4 Which point on the line is closest to the origin ? Answer The derivative of  is  . This derivative is zero at  . So the closest point is  .

Question 5 Where does the line meet the plane  ? Answer Equation (6) gives  .So  . The meeting point is  .

Question 6 What line goes through  perpendicular to the plane  1 ?   
Answer The normal vector to the plane is  . That is v. The position vector to  is  . Then  .

COMPARING LINES AND PLANES

A line has one parameter or two equations. We give the starting point and velocity:  . That tells directly which points are on the line. Or we eliminate  to find the two equations in .5/.

A plane has one equation or two parameters! The equation is  . That tells us indirectly which points are on the plane. (Instead of knowing  ; weknow the equation they satisfy. Instead of directions  and  in the plane, we are told the perpendicular direction  :/ With parameters, the line contains  and the plane contains  . A plane looks worse with parameters  and  ), a line looks better.

Questions 5 and 6 connected lines to planes. Here are two more. See Problems  :

Question 7 When is the line  parallel to the plane ? When is it perpendicular ?

Answer The test is  . The test is  .

EXAMPLE 4 Find the plane containing  and the line of points  . That vector  will be in the plane.

Solution The vector  goes along the line. The vector  goes from  to  . Their cross product is

The plane  has this normal  and contains the point .1; 2; 1/.

SPEED, |D I|RECTION, DISTANCE, ACCELERATION

We go back to the curve traced out by  . The derivative  is the velocity vector along that curve. The spee |d  |is the magnitude of  :

The direction of the velocity vector is  . This is a unit vector, since  is divided by its length. The unit tangent vector  is denoted by  .

The tangent vector is constant for lines. It changes direction for curves.

EXAMPLE 5 (important) Find v and  and T for steady motion around a circle:

Solution The positionavector is  sin !t j. The velocity is

 .tangent, not unit tangent/

The speed is the radius  times the angular velocity  :

The unit tangent vector is  divided by  :

Think next about the distance traveled. Distance along a curve is always denoted by  (called arc le|ng |th). I don’t know why we use  —certainly n|ot as  the initial for speed. In fact speed is distance divided by time. The ratio  gives average speed;  is ins|ta |ntaneous speed. We are back to Chapter 1 and Section 8:3, the relation of speed to distance:

Notice that  and  and  are scalars. The d|irect|ion vector is  :

In Figure 12.3, the chord length (straight) is  . The arc length (curved) is  . As  and  approach zero, the ratio  approaches  .

Think finally about the acceleration vector  . It is the rate of change of velocity (not the rate of change of speed):

For steady motion along a line, as in  , there is no acceleration. The second derivatives are all zero. For steady motion around a circle, there is acceleration. In driving a car, you accelerate with the gas pedal or the brake. You also accelerate by turning the wheel. It is the velocity vector that changes, not the speed.

EXAMPLE 6 Find the distance  and acceleration  for circular motion.

Solution The speed in Example 5 is  . After integrating, the distance is  . At time  we have gone through an angle of  . The radius is  , so the distance traveled agrees with  times  . Note that the dimension of  is  (Angles are dimensionless.) At time  we have gone once around the circle— to  not back to  .

The acceleration is  . Remember 

That direction is opposite to  . This is a special motion, with no action on the gas pedal or the brake. All the acceleration is from turning. The magnitude is  , with the correct dimension of diastance=(time)2.

EXAMPLE 7 Find v?and  and a around the helix  .

Solution The velocity is  . The speed is

Then distance is  . At time  , a half turn iscomplete. The distance along the shadow is  (a half circle). The distance along the helix is  , because of its  slope.

The unit tangent vector is velocity=speed, and the acceleration is  :

EXAMPLE 8 Find  and  and a around the ellipse  .

Solution Take derivatives:  and  . This is the speed  . For the distance  , something bad happens (or something normal). The speed is not simplified by  We cannot integrate  to find a formula for  . The square root defeats us.

The acceleration  still points to the center. This is not the Earth going around the sun. The path is an ellipse but the speed is wrong. See Section 12:4 (the pound note) for a terrible erro|r  |in the position of the sun.

12A The basic formulas for motion along a curve are

Suppose we know the acceleration  and the initial velocity  and position  . Then  and  are also known. We integrate each component:

THE CURVE OF A BASEBALL

There is a nice discussion of curve balls in the calculus book by Edwards and Penney. We summarize it here (optionally). The ball leaves the pitcher’s hand five feet off the ground:  . The initial velocity is  (120 ft=sec is more than 80 miles per hour). The acceleration is  from gravity, plus a new term from spin. If the spin is aro und the  axis, and the ball goes along the  axis, then this acceleration is in the  direction. ( It comes from the crossproduct  there is a pressure difference on the sides of the ball.) A good pitcher can achieve  . The batter integrates as fast as he can:

Notice the  . The effect of spin is small at first, then suddenly bigger (as every batter knows). So is the effect of gravity—the ball starts to dive. At  , the i component is 60 feet and the ball reaches the batter. The  component is 1 foot and the  component is 2 feet—the curve goes low over the outside corner.

 , when the batter saw the ball halfway, the j component was zero. It looked as if it was coming right over the plate.