6.5 Enzymes

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Describe the role of enzymes in metabolic pathways Explain how enzymes function as molecular catalysts Discuss enzyme regulation by various factors

A substance that helps a chemical reaction to occur is a catalyst, and the special molecules that catalyze biochemical reactions are enzymes. Almost all enzymes are proteins, comprised of amino acid chains, and they perform the critical task of lowering the activation energies of chemical reactions inside the cell. Enzymes do this by binding to the reactant molecules, and holding them in such a way as to make the chemical bond-breaking and bond-forming processes take place more readily. It is important to remember that enzymes do not change the reaction's  . In other words, they do not change whether a reaction is exergonic (spontaneous) or endergonic. This is because they do not change the reactants' or products' free energy. They only reduce the activation energy required to reach the transition state (Figure 6.15).

Enzyme Active Site and Substrate Specificity

The chemical reactants to which an enzyme binds are the enzyme’s substrates. There may be one or more substrates, depending on the particular chemical reaction. In some reactions, a single-reactant substrate breaks down into multiple products. In others, two substrates may come together to create one larger molecule. Two reactants might also enter a reaction, both become modified, and leave the reaction as two products. The location within the enzyme where the substrate binds is the enzyme’s active site. This is where the “action” happens. Since enzymes are proteins, there is a unique combination of amino acid residues (also side chains, or R groups) within the active site. Different properties characterize each residue. These can be large or small, weakly acidic or basic, hydrophilic or hydrophobic, positively or negatively charged, or neutral. The unique combination of amino acid residues, their positions, sequences, structures, and properties, creates a very specific chemical environment within the active site. This specific environment is suited to bind, albeit briefly, to a specific chemical substrate (or substrates). Due to this jigsaw puzzle-like match between an enzyme and its substrates (which adapts to find the best fit between the transition state and the active site), enzymes are known for their specificity. The “best fit” results from the shape and the amino acid functional group’s attraction to the substrate. There is a specifically matched enzyme for each substrate and, thus, for each chemical reaction; however, there is flexibility as well.

The fact that active sites are so perfectly suited to provide specific environmental conditions also means that they are subject to local enviromental influences. It is true that increasing the environmental temperature generally increases reaction rates, enzyme-catalyzed or otherwise. However, increasing or decreasing the temperature outside of an optimal range can affect chemical bonds within the active site in such a way that they are less well suited to bind substrates. High temperatures will eventually cause enzymes, like other biological molecules, to denature, a process that changes the substance's natural properties. Likewise, the local environment's pH can also affect enzyme function. Active site amino acid residues have their own acidic or basic properties that are optimal for catalysis. These residues are sensitive to changes in pH that can impair the way substrate molecules bind. Enzymes are suited to function best within a certain pH range, and, as with temperature, extreme environmental pH values (acidic or basic) can cause enzymes to denature.

Induced Fit and Enzyme Function

For many years, scientists thought that enzyme-substrate binding took place in a simple “lock-and-key” fashion. This model asserted that the enzyme and substrate fit together perfectly in one instantaneous step. However, current research supports a more refined view scientists call induced fit (Figure 6.16). This model expands upon the lock-and-key model by describing a more dynamic interaction between enzyme and substrate. As the enzyme and substrate come together, their interaction causes a mild shift in the enzyme’s structure that confirms an ideal binding arrangement between the enzyme and the substrate's transition state. This ideal binding maximizes the enzyme’s ability to catalyze its reaction.

LINK TO LEARNING

View an induced fit animation at this website (http://openstax.org/l/hexokinase) .

When an enzyme binds its substrate, it forms an enzyme-substrate complex. This complex lowers the reaction's activation energy and promotes its rapid progression in one of many ways. On a basic level, enzymes promote chemical reactions that involve more than one substrate by bringing the substrates together in an optimal orientation. The appropriate region (atoms and bonds) of one molecule is juxtaposed to the other molecule's appropriate region with which it must react. Another way in which enzymes promote substrate reaction is by creating an optimal environment within the active site for the reaction to occur. Certain chemical reactions might proceed best in a slightly acidic or non-polar environment. The chemical properties that emerge from the particular arrangement of amino acid residues within an active site create the perfect environment for an enzyme’s specific substrates to react.

You have learned that the activation energy required for many reactions includes the energy involved in manipulating or slightly contorting chemical bonds so that they can easily break and allow others to reform. Enzymatic action can aid this process. The enzyme-substrate complex can lower the activation energy by contorting substrate molecules in such a way as to facilitate bondbreaking, helping to reach the transition state. Finally, enzymes can also lower activation energies by taking part in the chemical reaction itself. The amino acid residues can provide certain ions or chemical groups that actually form covalent bonds with substrate molecules as a necessary step of the reaction process. In these cases, it is important to remember that the enzyme will always return to its original state at the reaction's completion. One of enzymes' hallmark properties is that they remain ultimately unchanged by the reactions they catalyze. After an enzyme catalyzes a reaction, it releases its product(s).

Metabolism Control Through Enzyme Regulation

It would seem ideal to have a scenario in which all the encoded enzymes in an organism’s genome existed in abundant supply and functioned optimally under all cellular conditions, in all cells, at all times. In reality, this is far from the case. A variety of mechanisms ensure that this does not happen. Cellular needs and conditions vary from cell to cell, and change within individual cells over time. The required enzymes and energetic demands of stomach cells are different from those of fat storage cells, skin cells, blood cells, and nerve cells. Furthermore, a digestive cell works much harder to process and break down nutrients during the time that closely follows a meal compared with many hours after a meal. As these cellular demands and conditions vary, so do the amounts and functionality of different enzymes.

Since the rates of biochemical reactions are controlled by activation energy, and enzymes lower and determine activation energies for chemical reactions, the relative amounts and functioning of the variety of enzymes within a cell ultimately determine which reactions will proceed and at which rates. This determination is tightly controlled. In certain cellular environments, environmental factors like  and temperature partly control enzyme activity. There are other mechanisms through which cells control enzyme activity and determine the rates at which various biochemical reactions will occur.

Molecular Regulation of Enzymes

Enzymes can be regulated in ways that either promote or reduce their activity. There are many different kinds of molecules that inhibit or promote enzyme function, and various mechanisms exist for doing so. For example, in some cases of enzyme inhibition, an inhibitor molecule is similar enough to a substrate that it can bind to the active site and simply block the substrate from binding. When this happens, the enzyme is inhibited through competitive inhibition, because an inhibitor molecule competes with the substrate for active site binding (Figure 6.17). Alternatively, in noncompetitive inhibition, an inhibitor molecule binds to the enzyme at an allosteric site, a binding site away from the active site, and still manages to block substrate binding to the active site.

Some inhibitor molecules bind to enzymes in a location where their binding induces a conformational change that reduces the enzyme's affinity for its substrate. This type of inhibition is an allosteric inhibition (Figure 6.18). More than one polypeptide comprise most allosterically regulated enzymes, meaning that they have more than one protein subunit. When an allosteric inhibitor binds to an enzyme, all active sites on the protein subunits change slightly such that they bind their substrates with less efficiency. There are allosteric activators as well as inhibitors. Allosteric activators bind to locations on an enzyme away from the active site, inducing a conformational change that increases the affinity of the enzyme’s active site(s) for its substrate(s).

Everyday Connection

Drug Discovery by Looking for Inhibitors of Key Enzymes in Specific Pathways

Enzymes are key components of metabolic pathways. Understanding how enzymes work and how they can be regulated is a key principle behind developing many pharmaceutical drugs (Figure 6.19) on the market today. Biologists working in this field collaborate with other scientists, usually chemists, to design drugs.

Consider statins for example—which is a class of drugs that reduces cholesterol levels. These compounds are essentially inhibitors of the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase. HMG-CoA reductase is the enzyme that synthesizes cholesterol from lipids in the body. By inhibiting this enzyme, the drug reduces cholesterol levels synthesized in the body. Similarly, acetaminophen, popularly marketed under the brand name Tylenol, is an inhibitor of the enzyme cyclooxygenase. While it is effective in providing relief from fever and inflammation (pain), scientists still do not completely understand its mechanism of action.

How are drugs developed? One of the first challenges in drug development is identifying the specific molecule that the drug is intended to target. In the case of statins, HMG-CoA reductase is the drug target. Researchers identify targets through painstaking research in the laboratory. Identifying the target alone is not sufficient. Scientists also need to know how the target acts inside the cell and which reactions go awry in the case of disease. Once researchers identify the target and the pathway, then the actual drug design process begins. During this stage, chemists and biologists work together to design and synthesize molecules that can either block or activate a particular reaction. However, this is only the beginning: both if and when a drug prototype is successful in performing its function, then it must undergo many tests from invitroexperiments to clinical trials before it can obtain FDA approval to be on the market.

Many enzymes don’t work optimally, or even at all, unless bound to other specific non-protein helper molecules, either temporarily through ionic or hydrogen bonds or permanently through stronger covalent bonds. Two types of helper molecules are cofactors and coenzymes. Binding to these molecules promotes optimal conformation and function for their respective enzymes. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as iron  and magnesium  ). One example of an enzyme that requires a metal ion as a cofactor is the enzyme that builds DNA molecules, DNA polymerase, which requires a bound zinc ion  to function. Coenzymes are organic helper molecules, with a basic atomic structure comprised of carbon and hydrogen, which are required for enzyme action. The most common sources of coenzymes are dietary vitamins (Figure 6.20). Some vitamins are precursors to coenzymes and others act directly as coenzymes. Vitamin C is a coenzyme for multiple enzymes that take part in building the important connective tissue component, collagen. An important step in breaking down glucose to yield energy is catalysis by a multi-enzyme complex scientists call pyruvate dehydrogenase. Pyruvate dehydrogenase is a complex of several enzymes that actually requires one cofactor (a magnesium ion) and five different organic coenzymes to catalyze its specific chemical reaction. Therefore, enzyme function is, in part, regulated by an abundance of various cofactors and coenzymes, which the diets of most organisms supply.

capsules usually contain mixtures of all the vitamins at different percentages.

Enzyme Compartmentalization

In eukaryotic cells, molecules such as enzymes are usually compartmentalized into different organelles. This allows for yet another level of regulation of enzyme activity. Enzymes required only for certain cellular processes are sometimes housed separately along with their substrates, allowing for more efficient chemical reactions. Examples of this sort of enzyme regulation based on location and proximity include the enzymes involved in the latter stages of cellular respiration, which take place exclusively in the mitochondria, and the enzymes involved in digesting cellular debris and foreign materials, located within lysosomes.

Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways

Molecules can regulate enzyme function in many ways. However, a major question remains: What are these molecules and from where do they come? Some are cofactors and coenzymes, ions, and organic molecules, as you have learned. What other molecules in the cell provide enzymatic regulation, such as allosteric modulation, and competitive and noncompetitive inhibition? The answer is that a wide variety of molecules can perform these roles. Some include pharmaceutical and nonpharmaceutical drugs, toxins, and poisons from the environment. Perhaps the most relevant sources of enzyme regulatory molecules, with respect to cellular metabolism, are cellular metabolic reaction products themselves. In a most efficient and elegant way, cells have evolved to use their own reactions' products for feedback inhibition of enzyme activity. Feedback inhibition involves using a reaction product to regulate its own further production (Figure 6.21). The cell responds to the abundance of specific products by slowing down production during anabolic or catabolic reactions. Such reaction products may inhibit the enzymes that catalyzed their production through the mechanisms that we described above.

Producing both amino acids and nucleotides is controlled through feedback inhibition. Additionally, ATP is an allosteric regulator of some of the enzymes involved in sugar's catabolic breakdown, the process that produces ATP. In this way, when ATP is abundant, the cell can prevent its further production. Remember that ATP is an unstable molecule that can spontaneously dissociate into ADP. If too much ATP were present in a cell, much of it would go to waste. Alternatively, ADP serves as a positive allosteric regulator (an allosteric activator) for some of the same enzymes that ATP inhibits. Thus, when relative ADP levels are high compared to ATP, the cell is triggered to produce more ATP through sugar catabolism.

KEY TERMS

activation energy energy necessary for reactions to occur   
active site enzyme's specific region to which the substrate binds   
allosteric inhibition inhibition by a binding event at a site different from the active site, which induces a conformational change and reduces the enzyme's affinity for its substrate   
anabolic (also, anabolism) pathways that require an energy input to synthesize complex molecules from simpler ones   
ATP adenosine triphosphate, the cell’s energy currency   
bioenergetics study of energy flowing through living systems   
catabolic (also, catabolism) pathways in which complex molecules break down into simpler ones   
chemical energy potential energy in chemical bonds that releases when those bonds are broken   
coenzyme small organic molecule, such as a vitamin or its derivative, which is required to enhance an enzyme's activity   
cofactor inorganic ion, such as iron and magnesium ions, required for optimal enzyme activity regulation   
competitive inhibition type of inhibition in which the inhibitor competes with the substrate molecule by binding to the enzyme's active site   
denature process that changes a subtance's natural properties   
endergonic describes chemical reactions that require energy input   
enthalpy a system's total energy   
entropy (S) measure of randomness or disorder within a system   
exergonic describes chemical reactions that release free energy   
feedback inhibition a product's effect of a reaction sequence to decrease its further production by inhibiting the first enzyme's activity in the pathway that produces it   
free energy Gibbs free energy is the usable energy, or energy that is available to do work   
heat energy transferred from one system to another that is not work (energy of the molecules' motion or particles)   
heat energy total bond energy of reactants or products in a chemical reaction   
induced fit dynamic fit between the enzyme and its substrate, in which both components modify their structures to allow for ideal binding   
kinetic energy energy type that takes place with objects or particles in motion   
metabolism all the chemical reactions that take place inside cells, including anabolism and catabolism   
phosphoanhydride bond bond that connects phosphates in an ATP molecule   
potential energy energy type that has the potential to do work; stored energy   
substrate molecule on which the enzyme acts   
thermodynamics study of energy and energy transfer involving physical matter   
transition state high-energy, unstable state (an intermediate form between the substrate and the product) occurring during a chemical reaction

CHAPTER SUMMARY 6.1 Energy and Metabolism

Cells perform the functions of life through various chemical reactions. A cell’s metabolism refers to the chemical reactions that take place within it. There are metabolic reactions that involve breaking down complex chemicals into simpler ones, such as breaking down large macromolecules. Scientists refer to this process as catabolism, and we associate such reactions an energy release. On the other end of the spectrum, anabolism refers to metabolic processes that build complex molecules out of simpler ones, such as macromolecule synthesis. Anabolic processes require energy. Glucose synthesis and glucose breakdown are examples of anabolic and catabolic pathways, respectively.

6.2 Potential, Kinetic, Free, and Activation Energy

Energy comes in many different forms. Objects in motion do physical work, and kinetic energy is the energy of objects in motion. Objects that are not in motion may have the potential to do work, and thus, have potential energy. Molecules also have potential energy because breaking molecular bonds has the potential to release energy. Living cells depend on harvesting potential energy from molecular bonds to perform work. Free energy is a measure of energy that is available to do work. A system's free energy changes during energy transfers such as chemical reactions, and scientists refer to this change as  .

A reaction's  can be negative or positive, meaning that the reaction releases energy or consumes energy, respectively. A reaction with a negative  that gives off energy is an exergonic reaction. One with a positive  that requires energy input is an endergonic reaction. Exergonic reactions are spontaneous because their products have less energy than their reactants. Endergonic reactions' products have a higher energy state than the reactants, and so these are nonspontaneous reactions. However, all reactions (including spontaneous -  reactions) require an initial energy input in order to reach the transition state, at which they will proceed. This initial input of energy is the activation energy.

6.3 The Laws of Thermodynamics

In studying energy, scientists use the term “system” to refer to the matter and its environment involved in energy transfers. Everything outside of the system is the surroundings. Single cells are biological systems. We can think of systems as having a certain amount of order. It takes energy to make a system more ordered. The more ordered a system, the lower its entropy. Entropy is a measure of a system's disorder. As a system becomes more disordered, the lower its energy and the higher its entropy.

The laws of thermodynamics are a series of laws that describe the properties and processes of energy transfer. The first law states that the total amount of energy in the universe is constant. This means that energy cannot be created or destroyed, only transferred or transformed. The second law of thermodynamics states that every energy transfer involves some loss of energy in an unusable form, such as heat energy, resulting in a more disordered system. In other words, no energy transfer is completely efficient, and all transfers trend toward disorder.

6.4 ATP: Adenosine Triphosphate

ATP is the primary energy-supplying molecule for living cells. ATP is comprised of a nucleotide, a five-carbon sugar, and three phosphate groups. The bonds that connect the phosphates (phosphoanhydride bonds) have high-energy content. The energy released from ATP hydrolysis into   performs cellular work. Cells use ATP to perform work by coupling ATP hydrolysis' exergonic reaction with endergonic reactions. ATP donates its phosphate group to another molecule via phosphorylation. The phosphorylated molecule is at a higher-energy state and is less stable than its unphosphorylated form, and this added energy from phosphate allows the molecule to undergo its endergonic reaction.

6.5 Enzymes

Enzymes are chemical catalysts that accelerate chemical reactions at physiological temperatures by lowering their activation energy. Enzymes are usually proteins consisting of one or more polypeptide chains. Enzymes have an active site that provides a unique chemical environment, comprised of certain amino acid R groups (residues). This unique environment is perfectly suited to convert particular chemical reactants for that enzyme, scientists call substrates, into unstable intermediates that they call transition states. Enzymes and substrates bind with an induced fit, which means that enzymes undergo slight conformational adjustments upon substrate contact, leading to full, optimal binding. Enzymes bind to substrates and catalyze reactions in four different ways: bringing substrates together in an optimal orientation, compromising the bond structures of substrates so that bonds can break down more easily, providing optimal environmental conditions for a reaction to occur, or participating directly in their chemical reaction by forming transient covalent bonds with the substrates.

Enzyme action must be regulated so that in a given cell at a given time, the desired reactions catalyze and the undesired reactions are not. Enzymes are regulated by cellular conditions, such as temperature and pH. They are also regulated through their location within a cell, sometimes compartmentalized so that they can only catalyze reactions under certain circumstances. Enzyme inhibition and activation via other molecules are other important ways that enzymes are regulated. Inhibitors can act competitively, noncompetitively, or allosterically. Noncompetitive inhibitors are usually allosteric. Activators can also enhance enzyme function allosterically. The most common method by which cells regulate the enzymes in metabolic pathways is through feedback inhibition. During feedback inhibition, metabolic pathway products serve as inhibitors (usually allosteric) of one or more of the enzymes (usually the first committed enzyme of the pathway) involved in the pathway that produces them.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 6.8 Look at each of the processes, and decide if it is endergonic or exergonic. In each case, does enthalpy increase or decrease, and does entropy increase or decrease?   
2. Figure 6.10 If no activation energy were required to break down sucrose (table sugar), would you be able to store it in a sugar bowl?

3. Figure 6.14 One ATP molecule's hydrolysis releases 7.3  of energy  of energy). If it takes 2.1 kcal/mol of energy to move one  across the membrane  of energy), how many sodium ions could one ATP molecule's hydrolysis move?

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. Energy is stored long-term in the bonds of and used short-term to perform work from a(n) molecule.

a. ATP : glucose   
b. an anabolic molecule : catabolic molecule c. glucose : ATP   
d. a catabolic molecule : anabolic molecule

5. DNA replication involves unwinding two strands of parent DNA, copying each strand to synthesize complementary strands, and releasing the parent and daughter DNA. Which of the following accurately describes this process?

a. This is an anabolic process.   
b. This is a catabolic process.   
c. This is both anabolic and catabolic.   
d. This is a metabolic process but is neither anabolic nor catabolic.

6. Consider a pendulum swinging. Which type(s) of energy is/are associated with the pendulum in the following instances: i. the moment at which it completes one cycle, just before it begins to fall back towards the other end, ii. the moment that it is in the middle between the two ends, and iii. just before it reaches the end of one cycle (just before instant i.).

a. i. potential and kinetic, ii. potential and kinetic, iii. kinetic   
b. i. potential, ii. potential and kinetic, iii. potential and kinetic   
c. i. potential, ii. kinetic, iii. potential and kinetic   
d. i. potential and kinetic, ii. kinetic iii. kinetic

7. Which of the following comparisons or contrasts between endergonic and exergonic reactions is false?

a. Endergonic reactions have a positive  and exergonic reactions have a negative  .   
b. Endergonic reactions consume energy and exergonic reactions release energy.   
c. Both endergonic and exergonic reactions require a small amount of energy to overcome an activation barrier.   
d. Endergonic reactions take place slowly and exergonic reactions take place quickly.

8. Which of the following is the best way to judge the relative activation energies between two given chemical reactions?

a. Compare the ∆G values between the two reactions.   
b. Compare their reaction rates.   
c. Compare their ideal environmental conditions.   
d. Compare the spontaneity between the two reactions.

9. Which of the following is not an example of an energy transformation?

a. turning on a light switch b. solar panels at work c. formation of static electricity d. none of the above

10. In each of the three systems, determine the state of entropy (low or high) when comparing the first and second: i. the instant that a perfume bottle is sprayed compared with 30 seconds later, ii. an old 1950s car compared with a brand new car, and iii. a living cell compared with a dead cell.

a. i. low, ii. high, iii. low b. i. low, ii. high, iii. high c. i. high, ii. low, iii. high d. i. high, ii. low, iii. low

11. The energy released by the hydrolysis of ATP is

a. primarily stored between the alpha and beta phosphates   
b. equal to −57 kcal/mol   
c. harnessed as heat energy by the cell to perform work   
d. providing energy to coupled reactions

12. Which of the following molecules is likely to have the most potential energy?

a. sucrose b. ATP c. glucose d. ADP

13. Which of the following is not true about enzymes:

a. They increase  of reactions.   
b. They are usually made of amino acids.   
c. They lower the activation energy of chemical reactions.   
d. Each one is specific to the particular substrate(s) to which it binds.

14. An allosteric inhibitor does which of the following?

a. Binds to an enzyme away from the active site and changes the conformation of the active site, increasing its affinity for substrate binding.   
b. Binds to the active site and blocks it from binding substrate.   
c. Binds to an enzyme away from the active site and changes the conformation of the active site, decreasing its affinity for the substrate.   
d. Binds directly to the active site and mimics the substrate.

15. Which of the following analogies best describes the induced-fit model of enzyme-substrate binding?

a. a hug between two people   
b. a key fitting into a lock   
c. a square peg fitting through the square hole and a round peg fitting through the round hole of a children’s toy   
d. the fitting together of two jigsaw puzzle pieces

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

16. Does physical exercise involve anabolic and/or catabolic processes? Give evidence for your answer.   
17. Name two different cellular functions that require energy that parallel human energy-requiring functions.   
18. Explain in your own words the difference between a spontaneous reaction and one that occurs instantaneously, and what causes this difference.   
19. Describe the position of the transition state on a vertical energy scale, from low to high, relative to the position of the reactants and products, for both endergonic and exergonic reactions.   
20. Imagine an elaborate ant farm with tunnels and passageways through the sand where ants live in a large community. Now imagine that an earthquake shook the ground and demolished the ant farm. In which of these two scenarios, before or after the earthquake, was the ant farm system in a state of higher or lower entropy?   
21. Energy transfers take place constantly in everyday activities. Think of two scenarios: cooking on a stove and driving. Explain how the second law of thermodynamics applies to these two scenarios.   
22. Do you think that the  for ATP hydrolysis is relatively low or high? Explain your reasoning.   
23. With regard to enzymes, why are vitamins necessary for good health? Give examples.   
24. Explain in your own words how enzyme feedback inhibition benefits a cell.