7.4.4 Read Only Memory (ROM)

Let us now consider simpler memory structures that are read-only in nature. We require read-only memories that save data that should never be modified. This can include security information in smartphones, BIOS chips in the motherboards of processors, or the programs in some microcontrollers. We desire read-only memory such that it is not possible for users to maliciously change the information stored in them. It turns that we can make simple modifications to our DRAM cell, and construct read-only memories.

ROM Memories

The capacitor in a DRAM cell stores a logical bit. If it stores a logical 1, then the charge across the capacitor is equal to the supply voltage  , and if it stores a logical 0, then the charge across the capacitor is 0V. Instead of having a capacitor, we can directly connect one end of the transistor to either ground or  depending upon the bit that we wish to store. This can be done at the time of designing and manufacturing the chip. The ROM memory cell as shown in Figure 7.32 replaces the capacitor by a direct connection to  or ground. A ROM array is similar to a DRAM array. However, it does not have write drivers and refresh circuitry.

PROM (Programmable ROM) Memories

Let us now look at a programmable ROM (PROM) cell that can be programmed only once to store either a 0 or 1. Typically, vendors of PROM cells release PROM arrays to the market. They are then programmed by microprocessor vendors to hold a given set of data values. Note that once data has been written, we cannot make any further modifications. Hence, it acts like read-only memory. A PROM cell is shown in Figure 7.33. We have a connection between the transistor and ground through an element known as an antifuse. An antifuse is the reverse of a conventional fuse. By default, an antifuse is a very weak conductor of current. However, when we transfer a large amount of current through the antifuse, it changes its structure and forms a conducting path. In the former case, the transistor is left floating, and it does not have the ability to drive the bit line to a logical 0. Hence, we can infer that the cell stores a logical 1. Once, the antifuse becomes conducting, the transistor (if enabled by the word line) can drive the bit line to a logical 0. Thus, in this case, the transistor stores a logical 0. A PROM-cell-based array is similar to an array of ROM cells. Each bit line is initially precharged. After enabling the word line, if the voltage at the sense amplifiers does not increase, then we can infer a logical 1. However, if the voltage keeps decreasing towards 0 V, then we can infer a logical 0.

We can build antifuses with a variety of materials. Dielectric antifuses use a thin layer of a sensitive material (silicon oxides) between two conducting wires. This thin layer breaks down and forms a conducting path upon the application of a large current pulse. In place of dielectrics we can use other materials such as amorphous silicon.

Read only memories are useful in a limited set of scenarios since their contents cannot be modified. We have two related sets of devices called EPROM (Erasable PROM), and EEPROM (Electrically Erasable PROM). Typically, these memories are made of special transistors that allow charge storage in a structure known as a floating gate. EPROM memories could be erased by applying a strong ultraviolet light pulse to the floating gate. However, such memories are not used today, and have been superseded by flash memories that can be read, written, and erased electrically. Flash memories are explained in detail in Section 13.8.4.