CHAPTER 11

Vectors and Matrices

This chapter opens up a new part of calculus. It is multidimensional calculus, because the subject moves into more dimensions. In the first ten chapters, all functions depended on time  or position  —but not both. We had  or  . The graphs were curves in a plane. There was one independent variable  or  ) and one dependent variable  or  ). Now we meet functions  that depend on both  and  . Their graphs aresurfaces instead of curves. This brings us to the calculus of several variables.

Start with the surface that represents the function  or  or  . I emphasize functions, because that is what calculus is about.

EXAMPLE 7  is a traveling wave (cosine curve in motion).

At  the curve is  . At a later time, the curve moves to the right (Figure 11.1). At each  we get a cross-section of the whole  surface. For a wave traveling along a string, the height depends on position as well as time.

A similar function gives a wave going around a stadium. Each person stands up and sits down. Somehow the wave travels.

EXAMPLE 8  is a sloping roof (fixed in time).

The surface is two-dimensional—you can walk around on it. It is flat because  is a linear function. In the  direction the surface goes up at  . If  increases by 1, so does  . That slope is 1. In the  direction the roof is steeper (slope 3). There is a direction in between where the roof is steepest (slope  ).

EXAMPLE 9  is an ocean surface with traveling waves.

This surface moves. At each time  we have a new  surface. There are three variables,  and  for position and  for time. I can’t draw the function, it needs four dimensions! The base coordinates are  and the height is  . The alternative is a movie that shows the  surface changing with  .

At time  the ocean surface is given by  . The waves are in straight lines. The line  follows a crest because cos  . The top of the next wave is on the parallel line  , because cos  . Figure 11.1 shows the ocean surface at a fixed time.

The line  gives the crest at time  . The water goes up and down (like people in a stadium). The wave goes to shore; but the water stays in the ocean.

Of course multidimensional calculus is not only for waves. In business, demand is a function of price and date. In engineering, the velocity and temperature depend on position  and time  . Biology deals with many variables at once (and statistics is always looking for linear relations like  ). A serious job lies ahead, to carry derivatives and integrals into more dimensions.