1.6 Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain the dimensional analysis (factor label) approach to mathematical calculations involving quantities • Use dimensional analysis to carry out unit conversions for a given property and computations involving two or more properties

It is often the case that a quantity of interest may not be easy (or even possible) to measure directly but instead must be calculated from other directly measured properties and appropriate mathematical relationships. For example, consider measuring the average speed of an athlete running sprints. This is typically accomplished by measuring the timerequired for the athlete to run from the starting line to the finish line, and the distance between these two lines, and then computing spe dfrom the equation that relates these three properties:

An Olympic-quality sprinter can run  in approximately 10 s, corresponding to an average speed of

Note that this simple arithmetic involves dividing the numbers of each measured quantity to yield the number of the computed quantity  ) andlikewisedividing the units of each measured quantity to yield the unit of the computed quantity  ). Now, consider using this same relation to predict the time required for a person running at this speed to travel a distance of  . The same relation among the three properties is used, but in this case, the two quantities provided are a speed  and a distance  . To yield the sought property, time, the equation must be rearranged appropriately:

The time can then be computed as:

Again, arithmetic on the numbers  ) was accompanied by the same arithmetic on the units   ) to yield the number and unit of the result, 2.5 s. Note that, just as for numbers, when a unit is divided by an identical unit (in this case,  ), the result is “1”—or, as commonly phrased, the units “cancel.”

These calculations are examples of a versatile mathematical approach known as dimensional analysis (or the factor-label method). Dimensional analysis is based on this premise: theunitsofquantitiesmustbesubjected tothesamemathematicaloperationsastheiras ociatednumbers. This method can be applied to computations ranging from simple unit conversions to more complex, multi-step calculations involving several different quantities.

Conversion Factors and Dimensional Analysis

A ratio of two equivalent quantities expressed with different measurement units can be used as a unit conversion factor. For example, the lengths of  and 1 in. are equivalent (by definition), and so a unit conversion factor may be derived from the ratio,

Several other commonly used conversion factors are given in Table 1.6.

When a quantity (such as distance in inches) is multiplied by an appropriate unit conversion factor, the quantity is converted to an equivalent value with different units (such as distance in centimeters). For example, a basketball player’s vertical jump of 34 inches can be converted to centimeters by:

Since this simple arithmetic involves quantities, the premise of dimensional analysis requires that we multiply both numbersandunits. The numbers of these two quantities are multiplied to yield the number of the product quantity, 86, whereas the units are multiplied to yield  . Just as for numbers, a ratio of identical units is also numerically equal to one,  and the unit product thus simplifies to cm. (When identical units divide to yield a factor of 1, they are said to “cancel.”) Dimensional analysis may be used to confirm the proper application of unit conversion factors as demonstrated in the following example.

EXAMPLE 1.8

Using a Unit Conversion Factor

The mass of a competition frisbee is  . Convert its mass to ounces using the unit conversion factor derived

from the relationship  (Table 1.6).

Solution

Given the conversion factor, the mass in ounces may be derived using an equation similar to the one used for converting length from inches to centimeters.

The unit conversion factor may be represented as:

The correct unit conversion factor is the ratio that cancels the units of grams and leaves ounces.

Check Your Learning

Convert a volume of 9.345 qt to liters.

Answer: 8.844 L

Beyond simple unit conversions, the factor-label method can be used to solve more complex problems involving computations. Regardless of the details, the basic approach is the same—all the factorsinvolved in the calculation must be appropriately oriented to ensure that their labels(units) will appropriately cancel and/ or combine to yield the desired unit in the result. As your study of chemistry continues, you will encounter many opportunities to apply this approach.

EXAMPLE 1.9

Computing Quantities from Measurement Results and Known Mathematical Relations

What is the density of common antifreeze in units of g/mL? A 4.00-qt sample of the antifreeze weighs 9.26 l

Solution

Since  , we need to divide the mass in grams by the volume in milliliters. In general: the number of units of  the number of units of  unit conversion factor. The necessary conversion factors are given in Table  :  qt;  . Mass may be converted from pounds to grams as follows:

Volume may be converted from quarts to milliliters via two steps:

Step 1. Convertquartstoliters.

Step 2. Convertliterstomililiters.

Then,

Alternatively, the calculation could be set up in a way that uses three unit conversion factors sequentially as follows:

Check Your Learning

What is the volume in liters of 1.000 oz, given that  qt and  (exactly)?

Answer: 

EXAMPLE 1.10

Computing Quantities from Measurement Results and Known Mathematical Relations

While being driven from Philadelphia to Atlanta, a distance of about  , a 2014 Lamborghini Aventador Roadster uses 213 L gasoline.

(a) What (average) fuel economy, in miles per gallon, did the Roadster get during this trip? (b) If gasoline costs  3.80$ per gallon, what was the fuel cost for this trip?

Solution

(a) First convert distance from kilometers to miles:

and then convert volume from liters to gallons:

Finally,

Alternatively, the calculation could be set up in a way that uses all the conversion factors sequentially, as follows:

(b) Using the previously calculated volume in gallons, we find:

Check Your Learning

A Toyota Prius Hybrid uses  gasoline to drive from San Francisco to Seattle, a distance of  (two significant digits).

(a) What (average) fuel economy, in miles per gallon, did the Prius get during this trip? (b) If gasoline costs  3.90$ per gallon, what was the fuel cost for this trip?

Conversion of Temperature Units

We use the word temperature to refer to the hotness or coldness of a substance. One way we measure a change in temperature is to use the fact that most substances expand when their temperature increases and contract when their temperature decreases. The liquid in a common glass thermometer changes its volume as the temperature changes, and the position of the trapped liquid's surface along a printed scale may be used as a measure of temperature.

Temperature scales are defined relative to selected reference temperatures: Two of the most commonly used are the freezing and boiling temperatures of water at a specified atmospheric pressure. On the Celsius scale, 0  is defined as the freezing temperature of water and  as the boiling temperature of water. The space between the two temperatures is divided into 100 equal intervals, which we call degrees. On the Fahrenheit scale, the freezing point of water is defined as  and the boiling temperature as  . The space between these two points on a Fahrenheit thermometer is divided into 180 equal parts (degrees).

Defining the Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales as described in the previous paragraph results in a slightly more complex relationship between temperature values on these two scales than for different units of measure for other properties. Most measurement units for a given property are directly proportional to one another  . Using familiar length units as one example:

where  length in feet,  length in inches, and the proportionality constant, m, is the conversion factor. The Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales, however, do not share a common zero point, and so the relationship between these two scales is a linear one rather than a proportional one  ). Consequently, converting a temperature from one of these scales into the other requires more than simple multiplication by a conversion factor, m, it also must take into account differences in the scales’ zero points (b).

The linear equation relating Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatures is easily derived from the two temperatures used to define each scale. Representing the Celsius temperature as  and the Fahrenheit temperature as y, the slope,  , is computed to be:

The y-intercept of the equation,  , is then calculated using either of the equivalent temperature pairs,   ) or  ), as:

The equation relating the temperature  scales is then:

An abbreviated form of this equation that omits the measurement units is:

Rearrangement of this equation yields the form useful for converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius:

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the SI unit of temperature is the kelvin (K). Unlike the Celsius and Fahrenheit scales, the kelvin scale is an absolute temperature scale in which 0 (zero) K corresponds to the lowest temperature that can theoretically be achieved. Since the kelvin temperature scale is absolute, a degree symbol is not included in the unit abbreviation, K. The early 19th-century discovery of the relationship between a gas’s volume and temperature suggested that the volume of a gas would be zero at  . In 1848, British physicist William Thompson, who later adopted the title of Lord Kelvin, proposed an absolute temperature scale based on this concept (further treatment of this topic is provided in this text’s chapter on gases).

The freezing temperature of water on this scale is  and its boiling temperature is 373.15 K. Notice the numerical difference in these two reference temperatures is 100, the same as for the Celsius scale, and so the linear relation between these two temperature scales will exhibit a slope of  . Following the same approach, the equations for converting between the kelvin and Celsius temperature scales are derived to be:

The 273.15 in these equations has been determined experimentally, so it is not exact. Figure 1.28 shows the relationship among the three temperature scales.

Although the kelvin (absolute) temperature scale is the official SI temperature scale, Celsius is commonly used in many scientific contexts and is the scale of choice for nonscience contexts in almost all areas of the world. Very few countries (the U.S. and its territories, the Bahamas, Belize, Cayman Islands, and Palau) still use Fahrenheit for weather, medicine, and cooking.

EXAMPLE 1.11

Conversion from Celsius

Normal body temperature has been commonly accepted as  (although it varies depending on time of day and method of measurement, as well as among individuals). What is this temperature on the kelvin scale and on the Fahrenheit scale?

Solution

Check Your Learning

Convert  to K and  .

Answer: 354.07 K, 177.7 °F

EXAMPLE 1.12

Conversion from Fahrenheit

Baking a ready-made pizza calls for an oven temperature of  . If you are in Europe, and your oven thermometer uses the Celsius scale, what is the setting? What is the kelvin temperature?

Solution

 wo significant figures)  (two significant figures)

Check Your Learning

Convert  to  and K.

Answer: 

Key Terms

accuracy how closely a measurement aligns with a correct value   
atom smallest particle of an element that can enter into a chemical combination   
Celsius  unit of temperature; water freezes at 0  and boils at  on this scale   
chemical change change producing a different kind of matter from the original kind of matter   
chemical property behavior that is related to the change of one kind of matter into another kind of matter   
chemistry study of the composition, properties, and interactions of matter   
compound pure substance that can be decomposed into two or more elements   
cubic centimeter  or cc) volume of a cube with an edge length of exactly    
cubic meter  SI unit of volume   
density ratio of mass to volume for a substance or object   
dimensional analysis (also, factor-label method) versatile mathematical approach that can be applied to computations ranging from simple unit conversions to more complex, multi-step calculations involving several different quantities   
element substance that is composed of a single type of atom; a substance that cannot be decomposed by a chemical change   
exact number number derived by counting or by definition   
extensive property property of a substance that depends on the amount of the substance   
Fahrenheit unit of temperature; water freezes at  and boils at  on this scale   
gas state in which matter has neither definite volume nor shape   
heterogeneous mixture combination of substances with a composition that varies from point to point   
homogeneous mixture (also, solution) combination of substances with a composition that is uniform throughout   
hypothesis tentative explanation of observations that acts as a guide for gathering and checking information   
intensive property property of a substance that is independent of the amount of the substance   
kelvin (K) SI unit of temperature;    
kilogram (kg) standard SI unit of mass;  approximately 2.2 pounds   
law statement that summarizes a vast number of experimental observations, and describes or

predicts some aspect of the natural world law of conservation of matter when matter converts from one type to another or changes form, there is no detectable change in the total amount of matter present length measure of one dimension of an object liquid state of matter that has a definite volume but indefinite shape liter (L) (also, cubic decimeter) unit of volume; 1 L  macroscopic domain realm of everyday things that are large enough to sense directly by human sight and touch mass fundamental property indicating amount of matter matter anything that occupies space and has mass meter (m) standard metric and SI unit of length; 1  approximately 1.094 yards microscopic domain realm of things that are much too small to be sensed directly milliliter (mL)  of a liter; equal to  mixture matter that can be separated into its components by physical means molecule bonded collection of two or more atoms of the same or different elements physical change change in the state or properties of matter that does not involve a change in its chemical composition physical property characteristic of matter that is not associated with any change in its chemical composition plasma gaseous state of matter containing a large number of electrically charged atoms and/or molecules precision how closely a measurement matches the same measurement when repeated pure substance homogeneous substance that has a constant composition rounding procedure used to ensure that calculated results properly reflect the uncertainty in the measurements used in the calculation scientific method path of discovery that leads from question and observation to law or hypothesis to theory, combined with experimental verification of the hypothesis and any necessary modification of the theory second (s) SI unit of time SI units (International System of Units) standards fixed by international agreement in the International System of Units (LeSystème Internationald’Unités) significant figures (also, significant digits) all of

the measured digits in a determination, including the uncertain last digit   
solid state of matter that is rigid, has a definite shape, and has a fairly constant volume   
symbolic domain specialized language used to represent components of the macroscopic and microscopic domains, such as chemical symbols, chemical formulas, chemical equations, graphs, drawings, and calculations   
temperature intensive property representing the hotness or coldness of matter   
theory well-substantiated, comprehensive, testable explanation of a particular aspect of nature   
uncertainty estimate of amount by which measurement differs from true value   
unit standard of comparison for measurements   
unit conversion factor ratio of equivalent quantities expressed with different units; used to convert from one unit to a different unit   
volume amount of space occupied by an object   
weight force that gravity exerts on an object

Key Equations

density     

Summary

1.1 Chemistry in Context

Chemistry deals with the composition, structure, and properties of matter, and the ways by which various forms of matter may be interconverted. Thus, it occupies a central place in the study and practice of science and technology. Chemists use the scientific method to perform experiments, pose hypotheses, and formulate laws and develop theories, so that they can better understand the behavior of the natural world. To do so, they operate in the macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic domains. Chemists measure, analyze, purify, and synthesize a wide variety of substances that are important to our lives.

1.2 Phases and Classification of Matter

Matter is anything that occupies space and has mass. The basic building block of matter is the atom, the smallest unit of an element that can enter into combinations with atoms of the same or other elements. In many substances, atoms are combined into molecules. On earth, matter commonly exists in three states: solids, of fixed shape and volume; liquids, of variable shape but fixed volume; and gases, of variable shape and volume. Under hightemperature conditions, matter also can exist as a plasma. Most matter is a mixture: It is composed of two or more types of matter that can be present in varying amounts and can be separated by physical means. Heterogeneous mixtures vary in

composition from point to point; homogeneous mixtures have the same composition from point to point. Pure substances consist of only one type of matter. A pure substance can be an element, which consists of only one type of atom and cannot be broken down by a chemical change, or a compound, which consists of two or more types of atoms.

1.3 Physical and Chemical Properties

All substances have distinct physical and chemical properties, and may undergo physical or chemical changes. Physical properties, such as hardness and boiling point, and physical changes, such as melting or freezing, do not involve a change in the composition of matter. Chemical properties, such flammability and acidity, and chemical changes, such as rusting, involve production of matter that differs from that present beforehand.

Measurable properties fall into one of two categories. Extensive properties depend on the amount of matter present, for example, the mass of gold. Intensive properties do not depend on the amount of matter present, for example, the density of gold. Heat is an example of an extensive property, and temperature is an example of an intensive property.

1.4 Measurements

Measurements provide quantitative information that is critical in studying and practicing chemistry. Each measurement has an amount, a unit for comparison, and an uncertainty. Measurements can be represented in either decimal or scientific notation. Scientists primarily use SI (International System) units such as meters, seconds, and kilograms, as well as derived units, such as liters (for volume) and  (for density). In many cases, it is convenient to use prefixes that yield fractional and multiple units, such as microseconds (  seconds) and megahertz (  hertz), respectively.

1.5 Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision

Quantities can be defined or measured. Measured quantities have an associated uncertainty that is represented by the number of significant figures in the quantity’s number. The uncertainty of a calculated quantity depends on the uncertainties in the quantities used in the calculation and is

reflected in how the value is rounded. Quantities are characterized with regard to accuracy (closeness to a true or accepted value) and precision (variation among replicate measurement results).

1.6 Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results

Measurements are made using a variety of units. It is often useful or necessary to convert a measured quantity from one unit into another. These conversions are accomplished using unit conversion factors, which are derived by simple applications of a mathematical approach called the factor-label method or dimensional analysis. This strategy is also employed to calculate sought quantities using measured quantities and appropriate mathematical relations.

Exercises

1.1 Chemistry in Context

1. Explain how you could experimentally determine whether the outside temperature is higher or lower than   without using a thermometer.   
2. Identify each of the following statements as being most similar to a hypothesis, a law, or a theory. Explain your reasoning. (a) Falling barometric pressure precedes the onset of bad weather. (b) All life on earth has evolved from a common, primitive organism through the process of natural selection. (c) My truck’s gas mileage has dropped significantly, probably because it’s due for a tune-up.   
3. Identify each of the following statements as being most similar to a hypothesis, a law, or a theory. Explain your reasoning. (a) The pressure of a sample of gas is directly proportional to the temperature of the gas. (b) Matter consists of tiny particles that can combine in specific ratios to form substances with specific properties. (c) At a higher temperature, solids (such as salt or sugar) will dissolve better in water.   
4. Identify each of the underlined items as a part of either the macroscopic domain, the microscopic domain, or the symbolic domain of chemistry. For any in the symbolic domain, indicate whether they are symbols for a macroscopic or a microscopic feature. (a) The mass of a lead pipe is 14 lb. (b) The mass of a certain chlorine atom is 35 amu. (c) A bottle with a label that reads Al contains aluminum metal. (d) Al is the symbol for an aluminum atom.   
5. Identify each of the underlined items as a part of either the macroscopic domain, the microscopic domain, or the symbolic domain of chemistry. For those in the symbolic domain, indicate whether they are symbols for a macroscopic or a microscopic feature. (a) A certain molecule contains one H atom and one Cl atom. (b) Copper wire has a density of about  . (c) The bottle contains 15 grams of Ni powder. (d) A sulfur molecule is composed of eight sulfur atoms.   
6. According to one theory, the pressure of a gas increases as its volume decreases because the molecules in the gas have to move a shorter distance to hit the walls of the container. Does this theory follow a macroscopic or microscopic description of chemical behavior? Explain your answer.

7. The amount of heat required to melt 2 lbs of ice is twice the amount of heat required to melt 1 lb of ice. Is this observation a macroscopic or microscopic description of chemical behavior? Explain your answer.

1.2 Phases and Classification of Matter

8. Why is an object’s mass, rather than its weight, used to indicate the amount of matter it contains?   
9. What properties distinguish solids from liquids? Liquids from gases? Solids from gases?   
10. How does a heterogeneous mixture differ from a homogeneous mixture? How are they similar?   
11. How does a homogeneous mixture differ from a pure substance? How are they similar?   
12. How does an element differ from a compound? How are they similar?   
13. How do molecules of elements and molecules of compounds differ? In what ways are they similar?   
14. How does an atom differ from a molecule? In what ways are they similar?   
15. Many of the items you purchase are mixtures of pure compounds. Select three of these commercial   
products and prepare a list of the ingredients that are pure compounds.

16. Classify each of the following as an element, a compound, or a mixture:

(a) copper   
(b) water   
(c) nitrogen   
(d) sulfur   
(e) air   
(f) sucrose   
(g) a substance composed of molecules each of which contains two iodine atoms   
(h) gasoline

17. Classify each of the following as an element, a compound, or a mixture: (a) iron (b) oxygen (c) mercury oxide (d) pancake syrup (e) carbon dioxide (f) a substance composed of molecules each of which contains one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom (g) baking soda (h) baking powder

18. A sulfur atom and a sulfur molecule are not identical. What is the difference?

19. How are the molecules in oxygen gas, the molecules in hydrogen gas, and water molecules similar? How do they differ?   
20. Why are astronauts in space said to be “weightless,” but not “massless”?   
21. Prepare a list of the principal chemicals consumed and produced during the operation of an automobile.   
22. Matter is everywhere around us. Make a list by name of fifteen different kinds of matter that you encounter every day. Your list should include (and label at least one example of each) the following: a solid, a liquid, a gas, an element, a compound, a homogenous mixture, a heterogeneous mixture, and a pure substance.   
23. When elemental iron corrodes it combines with oxygen in the air to ultimately form red brown iron(III) oxide called rust. (a) If a shiny iron nail with an initial mass of  is weighed after being coated in a layer of rust, would you expect the mass to have increased, decreased, or remained the same? Explain. (b) If the mass of the iron nail increases to  , what mass of oxygen combined with the iron?

24. As stated in the text, convincing examples that demonstrate the law of conservation of matter outside of the laboratory are few and far between. Indicate whether the mass would increase, decrease, or stay the same for the following scenarios where chemical reactions take place: (a) Exactly one pound of bread dough is placed in a baking tin. The dough is cooked in an oven at  releasing a wonderful aroma of freshly baked bread during the cooking process. Is the mass of the baked loaf less than, greater than, or the same as the one pound of original dough? Explain. (b) When magnesium burns in air a white flaky ash of magnesium oxide is produced. Is the mass of magnesium oxide less than, greater than, or the same as the original piece of magnesium? Explain. (c) Antoine Lavoisier, the French scientist credited with first stating the law of conservation of matter, heated a mixture of tin and air in a sealed flask to produce tin oxide. Did the mass of the sealed flask and contents decrease, increase, or remain the same after the heating?

25. Yeast converts glucose to ethanol and carbon dioxide during anaerobic fermentation as depicted in the simple chemical equation here:

glucose  ethanol  carbon dioxide

(a) If  of glucose is fully converted, what will be the total mass of ethanol and carbon dioxide produced?   
(b) If the fermentation is carried out in an open container, would you expect the mass of the container and contents after fermentation to be less than, greater than, or the same as the mass of the container and contents before fermentation? Explain.   
(c) If  of carbon dioxide is produced, what mass of ethanol is produced?

1.3 Physical and Chemical Properties

26. Classify the six underlined properties in the following paragraph as chemical or physical: Fluorine is a pale yellow gas that reacts with most substances. The free element melts at  and boils at −188 °C. Finely divided metals burn in fluorine with a bright flame. Nineteen grams of fluorine will react with 1.0 gram of hydrogen.

27. Classify each of the following changes as physical or chemical: (a) condensation of steam (b) burning of gasoline (c) souring of milk (d) dissolving of sugar in water (e) melting of gold

28. Classify each of the following changes as physical or chemical: (a) coal burning (b) ice melting (c) mixing chocolate syrup with milk (d) explosion of a firecracker (e) magnetizing of a screwdriver

29. The volume of a sample of oxygen gas changed from  to  as the temperature changed. Is this a chemical or physical change?

30. A 2.0-liter volume of hydrogen gas combined with 1.0 liter of oxygen gas to produce 2.0 liters of water vapor. Does oxygen undergo a chemical or physical change?

31. Explain the difference between extensive properties and intensive properties.

32. Identify the following properties as either extensive or intensive. (a) volume (b) temperature (c) humidity (d) heat (e) boiling point

33. The density (d) of a substance is an intensive property that is defined as the ratio of its mass (m) to its volume (V).

Considering that mass and volume are both extensive properties, explain why their ratio, density, is intensive.

1.4 Measurements

34. Is one liter about an ounce, a pint, a quart, or a gallon?

35. Is a meter about an inch, a foot, a yard, or a mile?

36. Indicate the SI base units or derived units that are appropriate for the following measurements: (a) the length of a marathon race (26 miles 385 yards) (b) the mass of an automobile (c) the volume of a swimming pool (d) the speed of an airplane (e) the density of gold (f ) the area of a football field (g) the maximum temperature at the South Pole on April 1, 1913

37. Indicate the SI base units or derived units that are appropriate for the following measurements: (a) the mass of the moon (b) the distance from Dallas to Oklahoma City (c) the speed of sound (d) the density of air (e) the temperature at which alcohol boils (f) the area of the state of Delaware (g) the volume of a flu shot or a measles vaccination

38. Give the name and symbol of the prefixes used with SI units to indicate multiplication by the following exact quantities. (a) 103 (b) 10−2 (c) 0.1 (d)  (e) 1,000,000 (f) 0.000001

39. Give the name of the prefix and the quantity indicated by the following symbols that are used with SI base units.

(a) c (b) d (c) G (d) k (e) m (f ) n (g) p (h) T

40. A large piece of jewelry has a mass of 132.6 g. A graduated cylinder initially contains  water. When the jewelry is submerged in the graduated cylinder, the total volume increases to  . (a) Determine the density of this piece of jewelry. (b) Assuming that the jewelry is made from only one substance, what substance is it likely to be? Explain.

41. Visit this density simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16phetmasvolden) and click the "turn fluid into water" button to adjust the density of liquid in the beaker to  . (a) Use the water displacement approach to measure the mass and volume of the unknown material (select the green block with question marks). (b) Use the measured mass and volume data from step (a) to calculate the density of the unknown material. (c) Link out to the link provided. (d) Assuming this material is a copper-containing gemstone, identify its three most likely identities by comparing the measured density to the values tabulated at this gemstone density guide (https://www.ajsgem.com/articles/gemstone-density-definitive-guide.html).

(e) How are mass and density related for blocks of the same volume?

42. Visit this density simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16phetmasvolden) and click the "reset" button to ensure all simulator parameters are at their default values. (a) Use the water displacement approach to measure the mass and volume of the red block. (b) Use the measured mass and volume data from step (a) to calculate the density of the red block. (c) Use the vertical green slide control to adjust the fluid density to values well above, then well below, and finally nearly equal to the density of the red block, reporting your observations.

43. Visit this density simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16phetmasvolden) and click the “turn fluid into water” button to adjust the density of liquid in the beaker to  . Change the block material to foam, and then wait patiently until the foam block stops bobbing up and down in the water. (a) The foam block should be floating on the surface of the water (that is, only partially submerged). What is the volume of water displaced? (b) Use the water volume from part (a) and the density of water  to calculate the mass of water displaced. (c) Remove and weigh the foam block. How does the block’s mass compare to the mass of displaced water from part (b)?

1.5 Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision

44. Express each of the following numbers in scientific notation with correct significant figures:

(a) 711.0   
(b) 0.239   
(c) 90743   
(d) 134.2   
(e) 0.05499   
(f) 10000.0   
(g) 0.000000738592

45. Express each of the following numbers in exponential notation with correct significant figures: (a) 704 (b) 0.03344 (c) 547.9 (d) 22086 (e) 1000.00 (f) 0.0000000651 (g) 0.007157

46. Indicate whether each of the following can be determined exactly or must be measured with some de of uncertainty: (a) the number of eggs in a basket (b) the mass of a dozen eggs (c) the number of gallons of gasoline necessary to fill an automobile gas tank (d) the number of cm in  (e) the mass of a textbook (f) the time required to drive from San Francisco to Kansas City at an average speed of 

47. Indicate whether each of the following can be determined exactly or must be measured with some degree of uncertainty:

(a) the number of seconds in an hour (b) the number of pages in this book (c) the number of grams in your weight (d) the number of grams in 3 kilograms (e) the volume of water you drink in one day (f) the distance from San Francisco to Kansas City

48. How many significant figures are contained in each of the following measurements? (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g) 

49. How many significant figures are contained in each of the following measurements? (a)  (b)  (c) 86,002 J (d)  (e)  (f )  (g) 0.88400 s

50. The following quantities were reported on the labels of commercial products. Determine the number of significant figures in each. (a)  active ingredients (b) 12 tablets (c)  hydrogen peroxide (d) 5.5 ounces (e)  (f )  bismuth (g)  phosphoric acid (h)  inert ingredients

51. Round off each of the following numbers to two significant figures: (a) 0.436 (b) 9.000 (c) 27.2 (d) 135 (e)  (f ) 0.445

52. Round off each of the following numbers to two significant figures: (a) 517 (b) 86.3 (c)  (d) 5.0008 (e) 22.497 (f ) 0.885

53. Perform the following calculations and report each answer with the correct number of significant figures. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) 

54. Perform the following calculations and report each answer with the correct number of significant figures. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g) 28.7 – 0.0483 (h) 45.13

55. Consider the results of the archery contest shown in this figure. (a) Which archer is most precise? (b) Which archer is most accurate? (c) Who is both least precise and least accurate?

Classify the following sets of measurements as accurate, precise, both, or neither.

(a) Checking for consistency in the weight of chocolate chip cookies: 17.27 g, 13.05 g, 19.46 g,  (b) Testing the volume of a batch of  pipettes:  ,  ,  ,  (c) Determining the purity of gold:  ,  ,  , 

1.6 Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results

57. Write conversion factors (as ratios) for the number of:

(a) yards in 1 meter (b) liters in 1 liquid quart (c) pounds in 1 kilogram

58. Write conversion factors (as ratios) for the number of: (a) kilometers in 1 mile (b) liters in 1 cubic foot (c) grams in 1 ounce

59. The label on a soft drink bottle gives the volume in two units:  and 67.6 fl oz. Use this information to derive a conversion factor between the English and metric units. How many significant figures can you justify in your conversion factor?

60. The label on a box of cereal gives the mass of cereal in two units: 978 grams and 34.5 oz. Use this information to find a conversion factor between the English and metric units. How many significant figures can you justify in your conversion factor?   
61. Soccer is played with a round ball having a circumference between 27 and 28 in. and a weight between 14 and 16 oz. What are these specifications in units of centimeters and grams?   
62. A woman’s basketball has a circumference between 28.5 and 29.0 inches and a maximum weight of 20 ounces (two significant figures). What are these specifications in units of centimeters and grams?   
63. How many milliliters of a soft drink are contained in a 12.0-oz can?   
64. A barrel of oil is exactly 42 gal. How many liters of oil are in a barrel?   
65. The diameter of a red blood cell is about  in. What is its diameter in centimeters?   
66. The distance between the centers of the two oxygen atoms in an oxygen molecule is  m. What is this distance in inches?   
67. Is a 197-lb weight lifter light enough to compete in a class limited to those weighing  or less?   
68. A very good 197-lb weight lifter lifted  in a move called the clean and jerk. What was the mass of the weight lifted in pounds?   
69. Many medical laboratory tests are run using  blood serum. What is this volume in milliliters?   
70. If an aspirin tablet contains  aspirin, how many grams of aspirin does it contain?

71. Use scientific (exponential) notation to express the following quantities in terms of the SI base units in

Table 1.2: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g) 1 Ts (h) 27 ps (i) 

72. Complete the following conversions between SI units.

(a)  mg (b)  cm (c) 3779 μg = g (d) 781 mL = L (e)  g (f ) 27.8 m = km (g) 0.13 mL  _ L (h)  (i) 

73. Gasoline is sold by the liter in many countries. How many liters are required to fill a 12.0-gal gas tank?

74. Milk is sold by the liter in many countries. What is the volume of exactly 1/2 gal of milk in liters?

75. A long ton is defined as exactly 2240 lb. What is this mass in kilograms?

76. Make the conversion indicated in each of the following: (a) the men’s world record long jump, 29 ft  in., to meters (b) the greatest depth of the ocean, about  , to kilometers (c) the area of the state of Oregon,  , to square kilometers (d) the volume of 1 gill (exactly 4 oz) to milliliters (e) the estimated volume of the oceans,  , to cubic kilometers. (f) the mass of a 3525-lb car to kilograms (g) the mass of a 2.3-oz egg to grams

77. Make the conversion indicated in each of the following:

(a) the length of a soccer field,  (three significant figures), to feet   
(b) the height of Mt. Kilimanjaro, at 19,565 ft, the highest mountain in Africa, to kilometers   
(c) the area of an  -inch sheet of paper in    
(d) the displacement volume of an automobile engine, 161 in.3, to liters   
(e) the estimated mass of the atmosphere,  tons, to kilograms   
(f) the mass of a bushel of rye, 32.0 lb, to kilograms   
(g) the mass of a 5.00-grain aspirin tablet to milligrams 

78. Many chemistry conferences have held a 50-Trillion Angstrom Run (two significant figures). How long is this run in kilometers and in miles? 

79. A chemist’s 50-Trillion Angstrom Run (see Exercise 1.78) would be an archeologist’s 10,900 cubit run. How long is one cubit in meters and in feet? 

80. The gas tank of a certain luxury automobile holds 22.3 gallons according to the owner’s manual. If the density of gasoline is  , determine the mass in kilograms and pounds of the fuel in a full tank.

81. As an instructor is preparing for an experiment, he requires  phosphoric acid. The only container readily available is a  Erlenmeyer flask. Is it large enough to contain the acid, whose density is 1.83 

82. To prepare for a laboratory period, a student lab assistant needs  of a compound. A bottle containing  lb is available. Did the student have enough of the compound?

83. A chemistry student is  tall and weighs  . What is her height in inches and weight in pounds?

84. In a recent Grand Prix, the winner completed the race with an average speed of  . What was his speed in miles per hour, meters per second, and feet per second?

85. Solve these problems about lumber dimensions.

(a) To describe to a European how houses are constructed in the US, the dimensions of “two-by-four” lumber must be converted into metric units. The thickness  width  length dimensions are 1.50 in.  3.50 in.  ft in the US. What are the dimensions in    
(b) This lumber can be used as vertical studs, which are typically placed 16.0 in. apart. What is that distance in centimeters?

86. The mercury content of a stream was believed to be above the minimum considered safe—1 part per billion (ppb) by weight. An analysis indicated that the concentration was 0.68 parts per billion. What quantity of mercury in grams was present in  of the water, the density of which is  

87. Calculate the density of aluminum if  has a mass of  .

88. Osmium is one of the densest elements known. What is its density if  has a volume of    
89. Calculate these masses.

(a) What is the mass of  of mercury, density  (b) What is the mass of  octane, density  ?

90. Calculate these masses.

(a) What is the mass of  of sodium, density  ? (b) What is the mass of  gaseous chlorine, density 

91. Calculate these volumes. (a) What is the volume of  iodine, density  (b) What is the volume of  gaseous hydrogen, density 

92. Calculate these volumes. (a) What is the volume of  graphite, density  (b) What is the volume of 39.657 g bromine, density 

93. Convert the boiling temperature of gold,  into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.

94. Convert the temperature of scalding water,  , into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.

95. Convert the temperature of the coldest area in a freezer,  , to degrees Celsius and kelvin.

96. Convert the temperature of dry ice,  , into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.

7. Convert the boiling temperature of liquid ammonia,  , into degrees Celsius and kelvin.

98. The label on a pressurized can of spray disinfectant warns against heating the can above  What are the corresponding temperatures on the Celsius and kelvin temperature scales?

99. The weather in Europe was unusually warm during the summer of 1995. The TV news reported temperatures as high as  . What was the temperature on the Fahrenheit scale?