2.8 Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe a straight-line graph in terms of its slope and y-intercept.   
• Determine average velocity or instantaneous velocity from a graph of position vs. time.   
Determine average or instantaneous acceleration from a graph of velocity vs. time.   
Derive a graph of velocity vs. time from a graph of position vs. time. Derive a graph of acceleration vs. time from a graph of velocity vs. time.

A graph, like a picture, is worth a thousand words. Graphs not only contain numerical information; they also reveal relationships between physical quantities. This section uses graphs of position, velocity, and acceleration versus time to illustrate one-dimensional kinematics.

Slopes and General Relationships

First note that graphs in this text have perpendicular axes, one horizontal and the other vertical. When two physical quantities are plotted against one another in such a graph, the horizontal axis is usually considered to be an independent variable and the vertical axis a dependent variable. If we call the horizontal axis the  -axis and the vertical axis the  -axis, as in Figure 2.44, a straight-line graph has the general form

Here  is the slope, defined to be the rise divided by the run (as seen in the figure) of the straight line. The letter  is used for the  -intercept, which is the point at which the line crosses the vertical axis.

Graph of Position vs. Time (  , so  is constant)

Time is usually an independent variable that other quantities, such as position, depend upon. A graph of position versus time would, thus, have  on the vertical axis and  on the horizontal axis. Figure 2.45 is just such a straightline graph. It shows a graph of position versus time for a jet-powered car on a very flat dry lake bed in Nevada.

Using the relationship between dependent and independent variables, we see that the slope in the graph above is average velocity  and the intercept is position at time zero—that is,  . Substituting these symbols into  gives

or

Thus a graph of position versus time gives a general relationship among displacement(change in position), velocity, and time, as well as giving detailed numerical information about a specific situation.

The Slope of xvs. t

The slope of the graph of position  vs. time  is velocity  .

Notice that this equation is the same as that derived algebraically from other motion equations in Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension.

From the figure we can see that the car has a position of  at 0.50 s and  at  . Its position at other times can be read from the graph; furthermore, information about its velocity and acceleration can also be obtained from the graph.

EXAMPLE 2.17

Determining Average Velocity from a Graph of Position versus Time: Jet Car

Find the average velocity of the car whose position is graphed in Figure 2.45.

Strategy

The slope of a graph of  vs.  is average velocity, since slope equals rise over run. In this case, rise  change in position and run  change in time, so that

Since the slope is constant here, any two points on the graph can be used to find the slope. (Generally speaking, it is most accurate to use two widely separated points on the straight line. This is because any error in reading data from the graph is proportionally smaller if the interval is larger.)

Solution

1. Choose two points on the line. In this case, we choose the points labeled on the graph: (6.4 s, 2000 m) and (0.50 s,  ). (Note, however, that you could choose any two points.)

2. Substitute the  and  values of the chosen points into the equation. Remember in calculating change  we always use final value minus initial value.

yielding

Discussion

This is an impressively large land speed  , or about  : much greater than the typical highway speed limit of 60 mi/h  or  ), but considerably shy of the record of   or  set in 1997.

Graphs of Motion when  is constant but 

The graphs in Figure 2.46 below represent the motion of the jet-powered car as it accelerates toward its top speed, but only during the time when its acceleration is constant. Time starts at zero for this motion (as if measured with a stopwatch), and the position and velocity are initially  and  , respectively.

The graph of position versus time in Figure 2.46(a) is a curve rather than a straight line. The slope of the curve becomes steeper as time progresses, showing that the velocity is increasing over time. The slope at any point on a position-versus-time graph is the instantaneous velocity at that point. It is found by drawing a straight line tangent to the curve at the point of interest and taking the slope of this straight line. Tangent lines are shown for two points in Figure 2.46(a). If this is done at every point on the curve and the values are plotted against time, then the graph of velocity versus time shown in Figure 2.46(b) is obtained. Furthermore, the slope of the graph of velocity versus time is acceleration, which is shown in Figure 2.46(c).

EXAMPLE 2.18

Determining Instantaneous Velocity from the Slope at a Point: Jet Car

Calculate the velocity of the jet car at a time of 25 s by finding the slope of the  vs. graph in the graph below

Strategy

The slope of a curve at a point is equal to the slope of a straight line tangent to the curve at that point. This principle is illustrated in Figure 2.48, where  is the point at  .

Solution

1. Find the tangent line to the curve at  .   
2. Determine the endpoints of the tangent. These correspond to a position of  at time 19 s and a position of  at time  .   
3. Plug these endpoints into the equation to solve for the slope,  .

Thus,

Discussion

This is the value given in this figure’s table for  at  . The value of  for  is plotted in Figure 2.48.   
The entire graph of  vs.  can be obtained in this fashion.

Carrying this one step further, we note that the slope of a velocity versus time graph is acceleration. Slope is rise divided by run; on a  vs.  graph, rise  change in velocity  and run  change in time  .

The Slope of vvs. t

The slope of a graph of velocity  vs. time  is acceleration  .

Since the velocity versus time graph in Figure 2.46(b) is a straight line, its slope is the same everywhere, implying that acceleration is constant. Acceleration versus time is graphed in Figure 2.46(c).

Additional general information can be obtained from Figure 2.48 and the expression for a straight line,  .

In this case, the vertical axis  is  , the intercept  is  , the slope  is  , and the horizontal axis  is . Substituting these symbols yields

A general relationship for velocity, acceleration, and time has again been obtained from a graph. Notice that this equation was also derived algebraically from other motion equations in Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension.

It is not accidental that the same equations are obtained by graphical analysis as by algebraic techniques. In fact, an important way to discoverphysical relationships is to measure various physical quantities and then make graphs of one quantity against another to see if they are correlated in any way. Correlations imply physical relationships and might be shown by smooth graphs such as those above. From such graphs, mathematical relationships can sometimes be postulated. Further experiments are then performed to determine the validity of the hypothesized relationships.

Graphs of Motion Where Acceleration is Not Constant

Now consider the motion of the jet car as it goes from  to its top velocity of  , graphed in Figure 2.49. Time again starts at zero, and the initial velocity is  . (This was the final velocity of the car in the motion graphed in Figure 2.46.) Acceleration gradually decreases from  to zero when the car hits  . The velocity increases until 55 s and then becomes constant, since acceleration decreases to zero at 55 s and remains zero afterward.

EXAMPLE 2.19

Calculating Acceleration from a Graph of Velocity versus Time

Calculate the acceleration of the jet car at a time of 25 s by finding the slope of the  vs. graph in Figure 2.49(a).

Strategy

The slope of the curve at  is equal to the slope of the line tangent at that point, as illustrated in Figure 2.49(a).

Solution

Determine endpoints of the tangent line from the figure, and then plug them into the equation to solve for slope, .

Discussion

Note that this value for  is consistent with the value plotted in Figure 2.49(b) at  .

A graph of position versus time can be used to generate a graph of velocity versus time, and a graph of velocity versus time can be used to generate a graph of acceleration versus time. We do this by finding the slope of the graphs at every point. If the graph is linear (i.e., a line with a constant slope), it is easy to find the slope at any point and you have the slope for every point. Graphical analysis of motion can be used to describe both specific and general characteristics of kinematics. Graphs can also be used for other topics in physics. An important aspect of exploring physical relationships is to graph them and look for underlying relationships.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

A graph of velocity vs. time of a ship coming into a harbor is shown below. (a) Describe the motion of the ship based on the graph. (b)What would a graph of the ship’s acceleration look like?

Solution

(a) The ship moves at constant velocity and then begins to decelerate at a constant rate. At some point, its deceleration rate decreases. It maintains this lower deceleration rate until it stops moving.

(b) A graph of acceleration vs. time would show zero acceleration in the first leg, large and constant negative acceleration in the second leg, and constant negative acceleration.

Glossary

acceleration the rate of change in velocity; the change in velocity over time   
acceleration due to gravity acceleration of an object as a result of gravity   
average acceleration the change in velocity divided by the time over which it changes   
average speed distance traveled divided by time during which motion occurs   
average velocity displacement divided by time over which displacement occurs   
deceleration acceleration in the direction opposite to velocity; acceleration that results in a decrease in velocity   
dependent variable the variable that is being measured; usually plotted along the  -axis   
displacement the change in position of an object   
distance the magnitude of displacement between two positions   
distance traveled the total length of the path traveled between two positions   
elapsed time the difference between the ending time and beginning time   
free-fall the state of movement that results from gravitational force only   
independent variable the variable that the dependent variable is measured with respect to; usually plotted along the  -axis   
instantaneous acceleration acceleration at a specific point in time   
instantaneous speed magnitude of the instantaneous velocity   
instantaneous velocity velocity at a specific instant, or the average velocity over an infinitesimal time interval   
kinematics the study of motion without considering its causes   
model simplified description that contains only those elements necessary to describe the physics of a physical situation   
position the location of an object at a particular time   
scalar a quantity that is described by magnitude, but not direction   
slope the difference in  -value (the rise) divided by the difference in  -value (the run) of two points on a straight line   
time change, or the interval over which change occurs   
vector a quantity that is described by both magnitude and direction   
y-intercept the value when  , or when the graph crosses the  -axis

Section Summary

2.1 Displacement

• Kinematics is the study of motion without considering its causes. In this chapter, it is limited to motion along a straight line, called onedimensional motion.   
• Displacement is the change in position of an object.   
• In symbols, displacement  is defined to be  where  is the initial position and  is the final position. In this text, the Greek letter  (delta) always means “change in” whatever quantity follows it. The SI unit for displacement is the meter  . Displacement has a direction as well as a magnitude.   
• When you start a problem, assign which direction will be positive.   
• Distance is the magnitude of displacement between two positions.   
Distance traveled is the total length of the path traveled between two positions.

2.2 Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate Systems

• A vector is any quantity that has magnitude and direction.   
• A scalar is any quantity that has magnitude but no direction.   
• Displacement and velocity are vectors, whereas distance and speed are scalars.   
• In one-dimensional motion, direction is specified by a plus or minus sign to signify left or right, up or down, and the like.

2.3 Time, Velocity, and Speed

• Time is measured in terms of change, and its SI unit is the second (s). Elapsed time for an event is  where  is the final time and  is the initial time. The initial time is often taken to be zero, as if measured with a stopwatch; the elapsed time is then just  .   
• Average velocity  is defined as displacement divided by the travel time. In symbols, average velocity is

• The SI unit for velocity is  .   
• Velocity is a vector and thus has a direction.   
• Instantaneous velocity  is the velocity at a specific instant or the average velocity for an infinitesimal interval. Instantaneous speed is the magnitude of the instantaneous velocity.   
• Instantaneous speed is a scalar quantity, as it has no direction specified.   
• Average speed is the total distance traveled divided by the elapsed time. (Average speed is not the magnitude of the average velocity.) Speed is a scalar quantity; it has no direction associated with it.

2.4 Acceleration

• Acceleration is the rate at which velocity changes. In symbols, average acceleration  is    
The SI unit for acceleration is .   
Acceleration is a vector, and thus has a both a magnitude and direction.   
• Acceleration can be caused by either a change in the magnitude or the direction of the velocity.   
Instantaneous acceleration  is the acceleration at a specific instant in time.   
• Deceleration is an acceleration with a direction opposite to that of the velocity.

2.5 Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension

• To simplify calculations we take acceleration to be constant, so that  at all times.   
• We also take initial time to be zero. Initial position and velocity are given a subscript 0; final values have no subscript. Thus,  The following kinematic equations for motion with constant  are useful:    
• In vertical motion,  is substituted for  .

2.6 Problem-Solving Basics for OneDimensional Kinematics

Thesixbasicproblemsolvingstepsforphysics are:   
Step1. Examine the situation to determine which physical principles are involved.   
Step2. Make a list of what is given or can be   
inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).   
Step3. Identify exactly what needs to be   
determined in the problem (identify the   
unknowns).   
Step4. Find an equation or set of equations that can help you solve the problem.   
Step5. Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation, and obtain numerical solutions complete with units.   
Step6. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?

2.7 Falling Objects

• An object in free-fall experiences constant acceleration if air resistance is negligible.   
• On Earth, all free-falling objects have an acceleration due to gravity  , which averages    
Whether the acceleration ashould be taken as  or  is determined by your choice of coordinate system. If you choose the upward direction as positive,  is negative. In the opposite case,  is positive. Since acceleration is constant, the kinematic equations above can be applied with the appropriate  or  substituted for  .   
• For objects in free-fall, up is normally taken as positive for displacement, velocity, and acceleration.

2.8 Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion

• Graphs of motion can be used to analyze motion.   
• Graphical solutions yield identical solutions to mathematical methods for deriving motion equations.   
• The slope of a graph of displacement  vs. time  is velocity  .   
• The slope of a graph of velocity  vs. time  graph is acceleration  .   
• Average velocity, instantaneous velocity, and acceleration can all be obtained by analyzing

graphs.

Conceptual Questions

2.1 Displacement

1. Give an example in which there are clear distinctions among distance traveled, displacement, and magnitude of displacement. Specifically identify each quantity in your example.   
2. Under what circumstances does distance traveled equal magnitude of displacement? What is the only case in which magnitude of displacement and displacement are exactly the same?   
3. Bacteria move back and forth by using their flagella (structures that look like little tails). Speeds of up to   have been observed. The total distance traveled by a bacterium is large for its size, while its displacement is small. Why is this?

2.2 Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate Systems

4. A student writes, “Abirdthatisdivingforpreyhasa spe dof  .” What is wrong with the student’s statement? What has the student actually described? Explain.   
5. What is the speed of the bird in Exercise 2.4?   
6. Acceleration is the change in velocity over time. Given this information, is acceleration a vector or a scalar quantity? Explain.   
7. A weather forecast states that the temperature is predicted to be  the following day. Is this temperature a vector or a scalar quantity? Explain.

2.3 Time, Velocity, and Speed

8. Give an example (but not one from the text) of a device used to measure time and identify what change in that device indicates a change in time.   
9. There is a distinction between average speed and the magnitude of average velocity. Give an example that illustrates the difference between these two quantities.   
10. Does a car’s odometer measure distance traveled or displacement? Does its speedometer measure speed or velocity?   
11. If you divide the total distance traveled on a car trip (as determined by the odometer) by the time for the trip, are you calculating the average speed or the magnitude of the average velocity? Under what circumstances are these two quantities the same?

12. How are instantaneous velocity and instantaneous speed related to one another? How do they differ?

2.4 Acceleration

13. Is it possible for speed to be constant while acceleration is not zero? Give an example of such a situation.   
14. Is it possible for velocity to be constant while acceleration is not zero? Explain.   
15. Give an example in which velocity is zero yet acceleration is not.   
16. If a subway train is moving to the left (has a negative velocity) and then comes to a stop, what is the direction of its acceleration? Is the acceleration positive or negative?   
17. Plus and minus signs are used in one-dimensional motion to indicate direction. What is the sign of an acceleration that reduces the magnitude of a negative velocity? Of a positive velocity?

2.6 Problem-Solving Basics for OneDimensional Kinematics

18. What information do you need in order to choose which equation or equations to use to solve a problem? Explain.   
19. What is the last thing you should do when solving a problem? Explain.

2.7 Falling Objects

20. What is the acceleration of a rock thrown straight upward on the way up? At the top of its flight? On the way down?   
21. An object that is thrown straight up falls back to Earth. This is one-dimensional motion. (a) When is its velocity zero? (b) Does its velocity change direction? (c) Does the acceleration due to gravity have the same sign on the way up as on the way down?   
22. Suppose you throw a rock nearly straight up at a coconut in a palm tree, and the rock misses on the way up but hits the coconut on the way down. Neglecting air resistance, how does the speed of the rock when it hits the coconut on the way down compare with what it would have been if it had hit the coconut on the way up? Is it more likely to dislodge the coconut on the way up or down? Explain.   
23. If an object is thrown straight up and air resistance is negligible, then its speed when it returns to the starting point is the same as when it was released. If air resistance were not negligible, how would its speed upon return compare with its initial speed? How would the maximum height to which it rises be affected?   
24. The severity of a fall depends on your speed when you strike the ground. All factors but the acceleration due to gravity being the same, how many times higher could a safe fall on the Moon be than on Earth (gravitational acceleration on the Moon is about  that of the Earth)?   
25. How many times higher could an astronaut jump on the Moon than on Earth if his takeoff speed is the same in both locations (gravitational acceleration on the Moon is about  of  on Earth)?

2.8 Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion

26. (a) Explain how you can use the graph of position versus time in Figure 2.52 to describe the change in velocity over time. Identify (b) the time  , or  ) at which the instantaneous velocity is greatest, (c) the time at which it is zero, and (d) the time at which it is negative.

27. (a) Sketch a graph of velocity versus time corresponding to the graph of position versus time given in Figure 2.53. (b) Identify the time or times  ,  , etc.) at which the instantaneous velocity is greatest. (c) At which times is it zero? (d) At which times is it negative?

28. (a) Explain how you can determine the acceleration over time from a velocity versus time graph such as the one in Figure 2.54. (b) Based on the graph, how does acceleration change over time?

29. (a) Sketch a graph of acceleration versus time corresponding to the graph of velocity versus time given in Figure 2.55. (b) Identify the time or times  ,  , etc.) at which the acceleration is greatest. (c) At which times is it zero? (d) At which times is it negative?

30. Consider the velocity vs. time graph of a person in an elevator shown in Figure 2.56. Suppose the elevator is initially at rest. It then accelerates for 3 seconds, maintains that velocity for 15 seconds, then decelerates for 5 seconds until it stops. The acceleration for the entire trip is not constant so we cannot use the equations of motion from Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension for the complete trip. (We could, however, use them in the three individual sections where acceleration is a constant.) Sketch graphs of (a) position vs. time and (b) acceleration vs. time for this trip.

31. A cylinder is given a push and then rolls up an inclined plane. If the origin is the starting point, sketch the position, velocity, and acceleration of the cylinder vs. time as it goes up and then down the plane.

Problems & Exercises

2.1 Displacement

1. Find the following for path A in Figure 2.57: (a) The distance traveled. (b) The magnitude of the displacement from start to finish. (c) The displacement from start to finish.

2. Find the following for path B in Figure 2.57: (a) The distance traveled. (b) The magnitude of the displacement from start to finish. (c) The displacement from start to finish.   
3. Find the following for path C in Figure 2.57: (a) The distance traveled. (b) The magnitude of the displacement from start to finish. (c) The displacement from start to finish.   
4. Find the following for path D in Figure 2.57: (a) The distance traveled. (b) The magnitude of the displacement from start to finish. (c) The displacement from start to finish.

2.3 Time, Velocity, and Speed

5. (a) Calculate Earth’s average speed relative to the Sun. (b) What is its average velocity over a period of one year?

6. A helicopter blade spins at exactly 100 revolutions per minute. Its tip is  from the center of rotation. (a) Calculate the average speed of the blade tip in the helicopter’s frame of reference. (b) What is its average velocity over one revolution?   
7. The North American and European continents are moving apart at a rate of about  . At this rate how long will it take them to drift  farther apart than they are at present?   
8. Land west of the San Andreas fault in southern California is moving at an average velocity of about 6 cm/y northwest relative to land east of the fault. Los Angeles is west of the fault and may thus someday be at the same latitude as San Francisco, which is east of the fault. How far in the future will this occur if the displacement to be made is  northwest, assuming the motion remains constant?   
9. On May 26, 1934, a streamlined, stainless steel diesel train called the Zephyr set the world’s nonstop long-distance speed record for trains. Its run from Denver to Chicago took 13 hours, 4 minutes, 58 seconds, and was witnessed by more than a million people along the route. The total distance traveled was  . What was its average speed in km/h and m/s?

10. Tidal friction is slowing the rotation of the Earth. As a result, the orbit of the Moon is increasing in radius at a rate of approximately 4 cm/year. Assuming this to be a constant rate, how many years will pass before the radius of the Moon’s orbit increases by 

11. A student drove to the university from their home and noted that the odometer reading of their car increased by  . The trip took  . (a) What was their average speed? (b) If the straightline distance from their home to the university is  in a direction  south of east, what was their average velocity? (c) If they returned home by the same path  after they left, what were their average speed and velocity for the entire trip?

12. The speed of propagation of the action potential (an electrical signal) in a nerve cell depends (inversely) on the diameter of the axon (nerve fiber). If the nerve cell connecting the spinal cord to your feet is  long, and the nerve impulse speed is  , how long does it take for the nerve signal to travel this distance?

13. Conversations with astronauts on the lunar surface were characterized by a kind of echo in which the earthbound person’s voice was so loud in the astronaut’s space helmet that it was picked up by the astronaut’s microphone and transmitted back to Earth. It is reasonable to assume that the echo time equals the time necessary for the radio wave to travel from the Earth to the Moon and back (that is, neglecting any time delays in the electronic equipment). Calculate the distance from Earth to the Moon given that the echo time was 2.56 s and that radio waves travel at the speed of light  .

14. A football quarterback runs  straight down the playing field in 2.50 s. He is then hit and pushed  straight backward in 1.75 s. He breaks the tackle and runs straight forward another  in 5.20 s. Calculate his average velocity (a) for each of the three intervals and (b) for the entire motion.

15. The planetary model of the atom pictures electrons orbiting the atomic nucleus much as planets orbit the Sun. In this model you can view hydrogen, the simplest atom, as having a single electron in a circular orbit  in diameter. (a) If the average speed of the electron in this orbit is known to be  , calculate the number of revolutions per second it makes about the nucleus. (b) What is the electron’s average velocity per revolution?

2.4 Acceleration

16. A cheetah can accelerate from rest to a speed of  in 7.00 s. What is its acceleration?

17. Professional Application Dr. John Paul Stapp was U.S. Air Force officer who studied the effects of extreme deceleration on the human body. On December 10, 1954, Stapp rode a rocket sled, accelerating from rest to a top speed of   in 5.00 s, and was brought jarringly back to rest in only  Calculate his (a) acceleration and (b) deceleration. Express each in multiples of  by taking its ratio to the acceleration of gravity.   
18. A commuter backs her car out of her garage with an acceleration of  . (a) How long does it take her to reach a speed of  (b) If she then brakes to a stop in 0.800 s, what is her deceleration?

19. Assume that an intercontinental ballistic missile goes from rest to a suborbital speed of  in  (the actual speed and time are classified). What is its average acceleration in  and in multiples of  ？

2.5 Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension

20. An Olympic-class sprinter starts a race with an acceleration of  . (a) What is her speed 2.40 s later? (b) Sketch a graph of her position vs. time for this period.

21. A well-thrown ball is caught in a well-padded mitt. If the deceleration of the ball is  , and  （  elapses from the time the ball first touches the mitt until it stops, what was the initial velocity of the ball?

22. A bullet in a gun is accelerated from the firing chamber to the end of the barrel at an average rate of  for  . What is its muzzle velocity (that is, its final velocity)?

23. (a) A light-rail commuter train accelerates at a rate of  . How long does it take to reach its top speed of  , starting from rest? (b) The same train ordinarily decelerates at a rate of  . How long does it take to come to a stop from its top speed? (c) In emergencies the train can decelerate more rapidly, coming to rest from  in 8.30 s. What is its emergency deceleration in 

24. While entering a freeway, a car accelerates from rest at a rate of  for  . (a) Draw a sketch of the situation. (b) List the knowns in this problem. (c) How far does the car travel in those  To solve this part, first identify the unknown, and then discuss how you chose the appropriate equation to solve for it. After choosing the equation, show your steps in solving for the unknown, check your units, and discuss whether the answer is reasonable. (d) What is the car’s final velocity? Solve for this unknown in the same manner as in part (c), showing all steps explicitly.

25. At the end of a race, a runner decelerates from a velocity of  at a rate of  . (a) How far does she travel in the next  (b) What is her final velocity? (c) Evaluate the result. Does it make sense?

26. Professional Application:

Blood is accelerated from rest to  in a distance of  by the left ventricle of the heart. (a) Make a sketch of the situation. (b) List the knowns in this problem. (c) How long does the acceleration take? To solve this part, first identify the unknown, and then discuss how you chose the appropriate equation to solve for it. After choosing the equation, show your steps in solving for the unknown, checking your units. (d) Is the answer reasonable when compared with the time for a heartbeat?

27. In a slap shot, a hockey player accelerates the puck from a velocity of  to  in the same direction. If this shot takes  , calculate the distance over which the puck accelerates.

28. A powerful motorcycle can accelerate from rest to   in only  . (a) What is its average acceleration? (b) How far does it travel in that time?

29. Freight trains can produce only relatively small accelerations and decelerations. (a) What is the final velocity of a freight train that accelerates at a rate of  for  , starting with an initial velocity of  (b) If the train can slow down at a rate of  , how long will it take to come to a stop from this velocity? (c) How far will it travel in each case?

30. A fireworks shell is accelerated from rest to a velocity of  over a distance of  . (a) How long did the acceleration last? (b) Calculate the acceleration.

31. A swan on a lake gets airborne by flapping its wings and running on top of the water. (a) If the swan must reach a velocity of  to take off and it accelerates from rest at an average rate of  , how far will it travel before becoming airborne? (b) How long does this take?

32. Professional Application:

A woodpecker’s brain is specially protected from large decelerations by tendon-like attachments inside the skull. While pecking on a tree, the woodpecker’s head comes to a stop from an initial velocity of  in a distance of only 2.00 mm. (a) Find the acceleration in  and in multiples of   . (b) Calculate the stopping time. (c) The tendons cradling the brain stretch, making its stopping distance  (greater than the head and, hence, less deceleration of the brain). What is the brain’s deceleration, expressed in multiples of 

33. An unwary football player collides with a padded goalpost while running at a velocity of  and comes to a full stop after compressing the padding and his body  . (a) What is his deceleration? (b) How long does the collision last?

34. In World War II, there were several reported cases of airmen who jumped from their flaming airplanes with no parachute to escape certain death. Some fell about 20,000 feet  , and some of them survived, with few life-threatening injuries. For these lucky pilots, the tree branches and snow drifts on the ground allowed their deceleration to be relatively small. If we assume that a pilot’s speed upon impact was 123 mph  , then what was his deceleration? Assume that the trees and snow stopped him over a distance of  .

35. Consider a grey squirrel falling out of a tree to the ground. (a) If we ignore air resistance in this case (only for the sake of this problem), determine a squirrel’s velocity just before hitting the ground, assuming it fell from a height of  . (b) If the squirrel stops in a distance of  through bending its limbs, compare its deceleration with that of the airman in the previous problem.

36. An express train passes through a station. It enters with an initial velocity of  and decelerates at a rate of  as it goes through. The station is  long. (a) How long did the nose of the train stay in the station? (b) How fast is it going when the nose leaves the station? (c) If the train is  long, when does the end of the train leave the station? (d) What is the velocity of the end of the train as it leaves?

37. Dragsters can actually reach a top speed of 145  in only 4.45 s—considerably less time than given in Example 2.10 and Example 2.11. (a) Calculate the average acceleration for such a dragster. (b) Find the final velocity of this dragster starting from rest and accelerating at the rate found in (a) for  (a quarter mile) without using any information on time. (c) Why is the final velocity greater than that used to find the average acceleration? Hint: Consider whether the assumption of constant acceleration is valid for a dragster. If not, discuss whether the acceleration would be greater at the beginning or end of the run and what effect that would have on the final velocity.

38. A bicycle racer sprints at the end of a race to clinch a victory. The racer has an initial velocity of  and accelerates at the rate of  for 7.00 s. (a) What is his final velocity? (b) The racer continues at this velocity to the finish line. If he was  from the finish line when he started to accelerate, how much time did he save? (c) One other racer was  ahead when the winner started to accelerate, but he was unable to accelerate, and traveled at  until the finish line. How far ahead of him (in meters and in seconds) did the winner finish?

39. In 1967, New Zealander Burt Munro set the world record for an Indian motorcycle, on the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah, with a maximum speed of  . The one-way course was  long. Acceleration rates are often described by the time it takes to reach  from rest. If this time was  , and Burt accelerated at this rate until he reached his maximum speed, how long did it take Burt to complete the course?

40. (a) A world record was set for the men’s  dash in the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing by Usain Bolt of Jamaica. Bolt “coasted” across the finish line with a time of  . If we assume that Bolt accelerated for 3.00 s to reach his maximum speed, and maintained that speed for the rest of the race, calculate his maximum speed and his acceleration. (b) During the same Olympics, Bolt also set the world record in the  dash with a time of  . Using the same assumptions as for the  dash, what was his maximum speed for this race?

2.7 Falling Objects

Assume air resistance is negligible unless otherwise stated.

41. Calculate the displacement and velocity at times of (a) 0.500, (b) 1.00, (c) 1.50, and (d) 2.00 s for a ball thrown straight up with an initial velocity of  . Take the point of release to be  .   
42. Calculate the displacement and velocity at times of (a) 0.500, (b) 1.00, (c) 1.50, (d) 2.00, and (e) 2.50 s for a rock thrown straight down with an initial velocity of  from the Verrazano Narrows Bridge in New York City. The roadway of this bridge is  above the water.   
43. A basketball referee tosses the ball straight up for the starting tip-off. At what velocity must a basketball player leave the ground to rise  above the floor in an attempt to get the ball?

44. A rescue helicopter is hovering over a person whose boat has sunk. One of the rescuers throws a life preserver straight down to the victim with an initial velocity of  and observes that it takes 1.8 s to reach the water. (a) List the knowns in this problem. (b) How high above the water was the preserver released? Note that the downdraft of the helicopter reduces the effects of air resistance on the falling life preserver, so that an acceleration equal to that of gravity is reasonable.

45. A dolphin in an aquatic show jumps straight up out of the water at a velocity of  . (a) List the knowns in this problem. (b) How high does his body rise above the water? To solve this part, first note that the final velocity is now a known and identify its value. Then identify the unknown, and discuss how you chose the appropriate equation to solve for it. After choosing the equation, show your steps in solving for the unknown, checking units, and discuss whether the answer is reasonable. (c) How long is the dolphin in the air? Neglect any effects due to his size or orientation.

46. A swimmer bounces straight up from a diving board and falls feet first into a pool. She starts with a velocity of  , and her takeoff point is  above the pool. (a) How long are her feet in the air? (b) What is her highest point above the board? (c) What is her velocity when her feet hit the water?

47. (a) Calculate the height of a cliff if it takes 2.35 s for a rock to hit the ground when it is thrown straight up from the cliff with an initial velocity of  . (b) How long would it take to reach the ground if it is thrown straight down with the same speed?

48. A very strong, but inept, shot putter puts the shot straight up vertically with an initial velocity of 11.0  . How long does he have to get out of the way if the shot was released at a height of  , and he is  tall?

49. You throw a ball straight up with an initial velocity of  . It passes a tree branch on the way up at a height of  . How much additional time will pass before the ball passes the tree branch on the way back down?

50. A kangaroo can jump over an object  high. (a) Calculate its vertical speed when it leaves the ground. (b) How long is it in the air?

51. Standing at the base of one of the cliffs of Mt. Arapiles in Victoria, Australia, a hiker hears a rock break loose from a height of  . He can’t see the rock right away but then does, 1.50 s later. (a) How far above the hiker is the rock when he can see it? (b) How much time does he have to move before the rock hits his head?

52. An object is dropped from a height of  above ground level. (a) Determine the distance traveled during the first second. (b) Determine the final velocity at which the object hits the ground. (c) Determine the distance traveled during the last second of motion before hitting the ground.

53. There is a  -high cliff at Half Dome in Yosemite National Park in California. Suppose a boulder breaks loose from the top of this cliff. (a) How fast will it be going when it strikes the ground? (b) Assuming a reaction time of  , how long will a tourist at the bottom have to get out of the way after hearing the sound of the rock breaking loose (neglecting the height of the tourist, which would become negligible anyway if hit)? The speed of sound is  on this day.

54. A ball is thrown straight up. It passes a  high window  off the ground on its path up and takes 0.312 s to go past the window. What was the ball’s initial velocity? Hint: First consider only the distance along the window, and solve for the ball's velocity at the bottom of the window. Next, consider only the distance from the ground to the bottom of the window, and solve for the initial velocity using the velocity at the bottom of the window as the final velocity.

55. Suppose you drop a rock into a dark well and, using precision equipment, you measure the time for the sound of a splash to return. (a) Neglecting the time required for sound to travel up the well, calculate the distance to the water if the sound returns in 2.0000 s. (b) Now calculate the distance taking into account the time for sound to travel up the well. The speed of sound is  in this well.

56. A steel ball is dropped onto a hard floor from a height of  and rebounds to a height of 1.45 m. (a) Calculate its velocity just before it strikes the floor. (b) Calculate its velocity just after it leaves the floor on its way back up. (c) Calculate its acceleration during contact with the floor if that contact lasts   . (d) How much did the ball compress during its collision with the floor, assuming the floor is absolutely rigid?

57. A coin is dropped from a hot-air balloon that is  above the ground and rising at  upward. For the coin, find (a) the maximum height reached, (b) its position and velocity 4.00 s after being released, and (c) the time before it hits the ground.

58. A soft tennis ball is dropped onto a hard floor from a height of  and rebounds to a height of  . (a) Calculate its velocity just before it strikes the floor. (b) Calculate its velocity just after it leaves the floor on its way back up. (c) Calculate its acceleration during contact with the floor if that contact lasts 3.50 ms  . (d) How much did the ball compress during its collision with the floor, assuming the floor is absolutely rigid?

2.8 Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion

Note: There is always uncertainty in numbers taken from graphs. If your answers differ from expected values, examine them to see if they are within data extraction uncertainties estimated by you.

59. (a) By taking the slope of the curve in Figure 2.58, verify that the velocity of the jet car is  at  . (b) By taking the slope of the curve at any point in Figure  , verify that the jet car’s acceleration is .

60. Using approximate values, calculate the slope of the curve in Figure 2.60 to verify that the velocity at  is approximately  . Assume all values are known to 2 significant figures.

61. Using approximate values, calculate the slope of the curve in Figure  to verify that the velocity at  is approximately  .   
62. By taking the slope of the curve in Figure 2.61, verify that the acceleration is  at  .

63. Construct the position graph for the subway shuttle train as shown in Figure 2.18(a). Your graph should show the position of the train, in kilometers, from  to  . You will need to use the information on acceleration and velocity given in the examples for this figure.

64. (a) Take the slope of the curve in Figure 2.62 to find the 6 jogger’s velocity at  . (b) Repeat at  . These values must be consistent with the graph in Figure 2.63.

5. A graph of  is shown for a world-class track sprinter in a  race. (See Figure 2.65). (a) What is his average velocity for the first 4 s? (b) What is his instantaneous velocity at  (c) What is his average acceleration between 0 and 4 s? (d) What is his time for the race?

66. Figure 2.66 shows the position graph for a particle for 6 s. (a) Draw the corresponding Velocity vs. Time graph. (b) What is the acceleration between 0 s and 2 s? (c) What happens to the acceleration at exactly 2 s?

67. Critical Thinking Two cars are side by side on a path where friction is negligible. Car A starts from rest and has a positive, constant acceleration while car B travels at a constant speed. The cars reach the same check point down the road at the same time. (a) Which car is traveling faster at the check point? Briefly explain your reasoning. (b) Based on experimental data, an equation that fits the data is suggested for the speed of car A at the check point,  , which may not be correct:  , where  is a constant with appropriate units and  is the initial velocity of car B. Is this equation consistent with your answer from part a? Explain why or why not. Does this equation make sense? Explain why or why not. (c) Graph the velocity of car A and the velocity of car B vs. distance along the path, starting when the cars are side by side.