20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the process by which electric signals are transmitted along a neuron.   
• Explain the effects myelin sheaths have on signal propagation.   
• Explain what the features of an ECG signal indicate.

Nerve Conduction

Electric currents in the vastly complex system of billions of nerves in our body allow us to sense the world, control parts of our body, and think. These are representative of the three major functions of nerves. First, nerves carry messages from our sensory organs and others to the central nervous system, consisting of the brain and spinal cord. Second, nerves carry messages from the central nervous system to muscles and other organs. Third, nerves

transmit and process signals within the central nervous system. The sheer number of nerve cells and the incredibly greater number of connections between them makes this system the subtle wonder that it is. Nerve conduction is a general term for electrical signals carried by nerve cells. It is one aspect of bioelectricity, or electrical effects in and created by biological systems.

Nerve cells, properly called neurons, look different from other cells—they have tendrils, some of them many centimeters long, connecting them with other cells. (See Figure 20.24.) Signals arrive at the cell body across synapsesor through dendrites, stimulating the neuron to generate its own signal, sent along its long axonto other nerve or muscle cells. Signals may arrive from many other locations and be transmitted to yet others, conditioning the synapses by use, giving the system its complexity and its ability to learn.

The method by which these electric currents are generated and transmitted is more complex than the simple movement of free charges in a conductor, but it can be understood with principles already discussed in this text. The most important of these are the Coulomb force and diffusion.

Figure 20.25 illustrates how a voltage (potential difference) is created across the cell membrane of a neuron in its resting state. This thin membrane separates electrically neutral fluids having differing concentrations of ions, the most important varieties being  ,  , and  (these are sodium, potassium, and chlorine ions with single plus or minus charges as indicated). As discussed in Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes, free ions will diffuse from a region of high concentration to one of low concentration. But the cell membrane is semipermeable, meaning that some ions may cross it while others cannot. In its resting state, the cell membrane is permeable to  and  , and impermeable to  . Diffusion of  and  thus creates the layers of positive and negative charge on the outside and inside of the membrane. The Coulomb force prevents the ions from diffusing across in their entirety. Once the charge layer has built up, the repulsion of like charges prevents more from moving across, and the attraction of unlike charges prevents more from leaving either side. The result is two layers of charge right on the membrane, with diffusion being balanced by the Coulomb force. A tiny fraction of the charges move across and the fluids remain neutral (other ions are present), while a separation of charge and a voltage have been created across the membrane.

The separation of charge creates a potential difference of 70 to  across the cell membrane. While this is a small voltage, the resulting electric field  across the only 8-nm-thick membrane is immense (on the order of  and has fundamental effects on its structure and permeability. Now, if the exterior of a neuron is taken to be at  , then the interior has a restingpotentialof about  . Such voltages are created across the membranes of almost all types of animal cells but are largest in nerve and muscle cells. In fact, fully  of the energy used by cells goes toward creating and maintaining these potentials.

Electric currents along the cell membrane are created by any stimulus that changes the membrane’s permeability. The membrane thus temporarily becomes permeable to  , which then rushes in, driven both by diffusion and the Coulomb force. This inrush of  first neutralizes the inside membrane, or depolarizesit, and then makes it slightly positive. The depolarization causes the membrane to again become impermeable to  , and the movement of  quickly returns the cell to its resting potential, or repolarizesit. This sequence of events results in a voltage pulse, called the actionpotential. (See Figure 20.26.) Only small fractions of the ions move, so that the cell can fire many hundreds of times without depleting the excess concentrations of  and  . Eventually, the cell must replenish these ions to maintain the concentration differences that create bioelectricity. This sodium-potassium pump is an example of activetransport, wherein cell energy is used to move ions across membranes against diffusion gradients and the Coulomb force.

The action potential is a voltage pulse at one location on a cell membrane. How does it get transmitted along the cell membrane, and in particular down an axon, as a nerve impulse? The answer is that the changing voltage and electric fields affect the permeability of the adjacent cell membrane, so that the same process takes place there. The adjacent membrane depolarizes, affecting the membrane further down, and so on, as illustrated in Figure 20.27. Thus the action potential stimulated at one location triggers a nerveimpulsethat moves slowly (about  along the cell membrane.

Some axons, like that in Figure 20.24, are sheathed with myelin, consisting of fat-containing cells. Figure 20.28 shows an enlarged view of an axon having myelin sheaths characteristically separated by unmyelinated gaps (called nodes of Ranvier). This arrangement gives the axon a number of interesting properties. Since myelin is an insulator, it prevents signals from jumping between adjacent nerves (cross talk). Additionally, the myelinated regions transmit electrical signals at a very high speed, as an ordinary conductor or resistor would. There is no action potential in the myelinated regions, so that no cell energy is used in them. There is an  signal loss in the myelin, but the signal is regenerated in the gaps, where the voltage pulse triggers the action potential at full voltage. So a myelinated axon transmits a nerve impulse faster, with less energy consumption, and is better protected from cross talk than an unmyelinated one. Not all axons are myelinated, so that cross talk and slow signal transmission are a characteristic of the normal operation of these axons, another variable in the nervous system.

The degeneration or destruction of the myelin sheaths that surround the nerve fibers impairs signal transmission and can lead to numerous neurological effects. One of the most prominent of these diseases comes from the body’s own immune system attacking the myelin in the central nervous system—multiple sclerosis. MS symptoms include fatigue, vision problems, weakness of arms and legs, loss of balance, and tingling or numbness in one’s extremities (neuropathy). It is more apt to strike younger adults, especially females. Causes might come from infection, environmental or geographic affects, or genetics. At the moment there is no known cure for MS.

Most animal cells can fire or create their own action potential. Muscle cells contract when they fire and are often induced to do so by a nerve impulse. In fact, nerve and muscle cells are physiologically similar, and there are even hybrid cells, such as in the heart, that have characteristics of both nerves and muscles. Some animals, like the infamous electric eel (see Figure 20.29), use muscles ganged so that their voltages add in order to create a shock great enough to stun prey.

Electrocardiograms

Just as nerve impulses are transmitted by depolarization and repolarization of adjacent membrane, the depolarization that causes muscle contraction can also stimulate adjacent muscle cells to depolarize (fire) and contract. Thus, a depolarization wave can be sent across the heart, coordinating its rhythmic contractions and enabling it to perform its vital function of propelling blood through the circulatory system. Figure 20.30 is a simplified graphic of a depolarization wave spreading across the heart from the sinoarterial(SA)node, the heart’s natural pacemaker.

An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a record of the voltages created by the wave of depolarization and subsequent repolarization in the heart. (They are also abbreviated EKG.) Voltages between pairs of electrodes placed on the chest are vector components of the voltage wave on the heart. Standard ECGs have 12 or more electrodes, but only three are shown in Figure 20.30 for clarity. Decades ago, three-electrode ECGs were performed by placing electrodes on the left and right arms and the left leg. The voltage between the right arm and the left leg is called the leadI potentialand is the most often graphed. We shall examine the lead II potential as an indicator of heartmuscle function and see that it is coordinated with arterial blood pressure as well.

Heart function and its four-chamber action are explored in Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law. Basically, the right and left atria receive blood from the body and lungs, respectively, and pump the blood into the ventricles. The right and left ventricles, in turn, pump blood through the lungs and the rest of the body, respectively. Depolarization of the heart muscle causes it to contract. After contraction it is repolarized to ready it for the next beat. The ECG measures components of depolarization and repolarization of the heart muscle and can yield significant information on the functioning and malfunctioning of the heart.

Figure 20.31 shows an ECG of the lead II potential and a graph of the corresponding arterial blood pressure. The major features are labeled P, Q, R, S, and T. The  waveis generated by the depolarization and contraction of the atria as they pump blood into the ventricles. The QRScomplexis created by the depolarization of the ventricles as they pump blood to the lungs and body. Since the shape of the heart and the path of the depolarization wave are not simple, the QRS complex has this typical shape and time span. The lead II QRS signal also masks the repolarization of the atria, which occur at the same time. Finally, the Twaveis generated by the repolarization of the ventricles and is followed by the next P wave in the next heartbeat. Arterial blood pressure varies with each part of the heartbeat, with systolic (maximum) pressure occurring closely after the QRS complex, which signals contraction of the ventricles.

Taken together, the 12 leads of a state-of-the-art ECG can yield a wealth of information about the heart. For example, regions of damaged heart tissue, called infarcts, reflect electrical waves and are apparent in one or more lead potentials. Subtle changes due to slight or gradual damage to the heart are most readily detected by comparing a recent ECG to an older one. This is particularly the case since individual heart shape, size, and orientation can cause variations in ECGs from one individual to another. ECG technology has advanced to the point where a portable ECG monitor can be incorporated into wearable devices and other small objects. See Figure 20.32.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Neuron

Stimulate a neuron and monitor what happens. Pause, rewind, and move forward in time in order to observe the ions as they move across the neuron membrane.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-7-nerveconductionelectrocardiograms)

Glossary

AC current current that fluctuates sinusoidally with time, expressed as  sin  , where Iis the current at time t,  is the peak current, and  is the frequency in hertz   
AC voltage voltage that fluctuates sinusoidally with time, expressed as  sin  , where  is the voltage at time t,  is the peak voltage, and  is the frequency in hertz   
alternating current (AC) the flow of electric charge that periodically reverses direction   
ampere (amp) the SI unit for current;    
bioelectricity electrical effects in and created by biological systems   
direct current (DC) the flow of electric charge in only one direction   
drift velocity the average velocity at which free charges flow in response to an electric field   
electric current the rate at which charge flows,  ΔQ/Δt   
electric power the rate at which electrical energy is supplied by a source or dissipated by a device; it is the product of current times voltage   
electrocardiogram (ECG) usually abbreviated ECG, a record of voltages created by depolarization and repolarization, especially in the heart   
microshock sensitive a condition in which a person’s skin resistance is bypassed, possibly by a medical procedure, rendering the person vulnerable to electrical shock at currents about 1/1000 the normally required level   
nerve conduction the transport of electrical signals by nerve cells   
ohm the unit of resistance, given by  V/A   
Ohm’s law an empirical relation stating that the current  is proportional to the potential difference  it is often written as  where  is the resistance   
ohmic a type of a material for which Ohm's law is valid   
resistance the electric property that impedes current; for ohmic materials, it is the ratio of voltage to current,    
resistivity an intrinsic property of a material, independent of its shape or size, directly proportional to the resistance, denoted by    
rms current the root mean square of the current,  , where  is the peak current, in an AC system   
rms voltage the root mean square of the voltage,  , where  is the peak voltage, in an AC system   
semipermeable property of a membrane that allows only certain types of ions to cross it   
shock hazard when electric current passes through a person   
short circuit also known as a “short,” a lowresistance path between terminals of a voltage source   
simple circuit a circuit with a single voltage source and a single resistor   
temperature coefficient of resistivity an empirical quantity, denoted by  , which describes the change in resistance or resistivity of a material with temperature   
thermal hazard a hazard in which electric current causes undesired thermal effects

Section Summary

20.1 Current

• Electric current  is the rate at which charge flows given by  where  is the amount of charge passing through an area in time  .   
The direction of conventional current is taken as the direction in which positive charge moves.   
The SI unit for current is the ampere (A), where  .   
• Current is the flow of free charges, such as electrons and ions.   
Drift velocity  is the average speed at which these charges move.

• Current  is proportional to drift velocity  , as expressed in the relationship  . Here,  is the current through a wire of cross-sectional area  . The wire’s material has a free-charge density  , and each carrier has charge  and a drift velocity  . Electrical signals travel at speeds about  times greater than the drift velocity of free electrons.

20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits

• A simple circuit isone in which there is a single voltage source and a single resistance. • One statement of Ohm’s law gives the relationship

between current  , voltage  , and resistance  in a simple circuit to be    
• Resistance has units of ohms  , related to volts and amperes by  V/A.   
• There is a voltage or  drop across a resistor, caused by the current flowing through it, given by  .

20.3 Resistance and Resistivity

• The resistance  of a cylinder of length  and cross-sectional area is , where is the resistivity of the material.   
Values of  in Table 20.1 show that materials fall into three groups—conductors,semiconductors, andinsulators. Temperature affects resistivity; for relatively small temperature changes  , resistivity is  , where  is the original resistivity and  is the temperature coefficient of resistivity.   
Table 20.2 gives values for  , the temperature coefficient of resistivity.   
• The resistance  of an object also varies with temperature:  , where  is the original resistance, and  is the resistance after the temperature change.

20.4 Electric Power and Energy

Electric power  is the rate (in watts) that energy is supplied by a source or dissipated by a device. Three expressions for electrical power are   
   
and   
   
The energy used by a device with a power  over a time  is  .

20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct Current

• Direct current (DC) is the flow of electric current in

Conceptual Questions

20.1 Current

1. Can a wire carry a current and still be neutral—that is, have a total charge of zero? Explain.

only one direction. It refers to systems where the source voltage is constant.   
• The voltage source of an alternating current (AC) system puts out  sin  , where  is the voltage at time  ,  is the peak voltage, and  is the frequency in hertz.   
• In a simple circuit,  and AC current is  sin  , where  is the current at time  , and  is the peak current.   
The average AC power is  .   
• Average (rms) current  and average (rms) voltage  are  and  where rms stands for root mean square.   
• Thus,  .   
• Ohm’s law for AC is    
Expressions for the average power of an AC circuit are  , and  , analogous to the expressions for DC circuits.

20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body

• The two types of electric hazards are thermal (excessive power) and shock (current through a person).   
• Shock severity is determined by current, path, duration, and AC frequency.   
Table 20.3 lists shock hazards as a function of current. Figure 20.22 graphs the threshold current for two hazards as a function of frequency.

20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

• Electric potentials in neurons and other cells are created by ionic concentration differences across semipermeable membranes.   
• Stimuli change the permeability and create action potentials that propagate along neurons.   
• Myelin sheaths speed this process and reduce the needed energy input.   
• This process in the heart can be measured with an electrocardiogram (ECG).

2. Car batteries are rated in ampere-hours  . To what physical quantity do ampere-hours correspond (voltage, charge, . . .), and what relationship do ampere-hours have to energy content?

3. If two different wires having identical crosssectional areas carry the same current, will the drift velocity be higher or lower in the better conductor? Explain in terms of the equation  , by considering how the density of charge carriers  relates to whether or not a material is a good conductor.   
4. Why are two conducting paths from a voltage source to an electrical device needed to operate the device?   
5. In cars, one battery terminal is connected to the metal body. How does this allow a single wire to supply current to electrical devices rather than two wires?   
6. Why isn’t a bird sitting on a high-voltage power line electrocuted? Contrast this with the situation in which a large bird hits two wires simultaneously with its wings.

20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits

7. The  drop across a resistor means that there is a change in potential or voltage across the resistor. Is there any change in current as it passes through a resistor? Explain.   
8. How is the  drop in a resistor similar to the pressure drop in a fluid flowing through a pipe?

20.3 Resistance and Resistivity

9. In which of the three semiconducting materials listed in Table 20.1 do impurities supply free charges? (Hint: Examine the range of resistivity for each and determine whether the pure semiconductor has the higher or lower conductivity.)   
10. Does the resistance of an object depend on the path current takes through it? Consider, for example, a rectangular bar—is its resistance the same along its length as across its width? (See Figure 20.33.)

11. If aluminum and copper wires of the same length have the same resistance, which has the larger diameter? Why?

12. Explain why  for the temperature variation of the resistance  of an object is not as accurate as  , which gives the temperature variation of resistivity  .

20.4 Electric Power and Energy

13. Why do incandescent lightbulbs grow dim late in their lives, particularly just before their filaments break?   
14. The power dissipated in a resistor is given by  , which means power decreases if resistance increases. Yet this power is also given by  , which means power increases if resistance increases. Explain why there is no contradiction here.

20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct Current

15. Give an example of a use of AC power other than in the household. Similarly, give an example of a use of DC power other than that supplied by batteries.   
16. Why do voltage, current, and power go through zero 120 times per second for 60-Hz AC electricity?   
17. You are riding in a train, gazing into the distance through its window. As close objects streak by, you notice that the nearby fluorescent lights make dashedstreaks. Explain.

20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body

18. Using an ohmmeter, a student measures the resistance between various points on his body. They find that the resistance between two points on the same finger is about the same as the resistance between two points on opposite hands—both are several hundred thousand ohms. Furthermore, the resistance decreases when more skin is brought into contact with the probes of the ohmmeter. Finally, there is a dramatic drop in resistance (to a few thousand ohms) when the skin is wet. Explain these observations and their implications regarding skin and internal resistance of the human body.   
19. What are the two major hazards of electricity?   
20. Why isn’t a short circuit a shock hazard?   
21. What determines the severity of a shock? Can you say that a certain voltage is hazardous without further information?   
22. An electrified needle is used to burn off warts, with the circuit being completed by having the patient sit on a large butt plate. Why is this plate large?   
23. Some surgery is performed with high-voltage electricity passing from a metal scalpel through the tissue being cut. Considering the nature of electric fields at the surface of conductors, why would you expect most of the current to flow from the sharp edge of the scalpel? Do you think highor low-frequency AC is used?   
24. Some devices often used in bathrooms, such as hairdryers, often have safety messages saying “Do not use when the bathtub or basin is full of water.” Why is this so?   
25. We are often advised to not flick electric switches with wet hands, dry your hand first. We are also advised to never throw water on an electric fire. Why is this so?   
26. Before working on a power transmission line, experts will touch the line with the back of the hand as a final check that the voltage is zero. Why the back of the hand?

Problems & Exercises

20.1 Current

1. What is the current in milliamperes produced by the solar cells of a pocket calculator through which 4.00 C of charge passes in    
2. A total of 600 C of charge passes through a flashlight in 0.500 h. What is the average current?   
3. What is the current when a typical static charge of  moves from your finger to a metal doorknob in    
4. Find the current when 2.00 nC jumps between your comb and hair over a  time interval.   
5. A large lightning bolt had a 20,000-A current and moved 30.0 C of charge. What was its duration?   
6. The 200-A current through a spark plug moves  of charge. How long does the spark last?   
27. Why is the resistance of wet skin so much smaller than dry, and why do blood and other bodily fluids have low resistances?   
28. Could a person on intravenous infusion (an IV) be microshock sensitive?   
29. In view of the small currents that cause shock hazards and the larger currents that circuit breakers and fuses interrupt, how do they play a role in preventing shock hazards?

20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

30. Note that in Figure 20.25, both the concentration gradient and the Coulomb force tend to move  ions into the cell. What prevents this?   
31. Define depolarization, repolarization, and the action potential.   
32. Explain the properties of myelinated nerves in terms of the insulating properties of myelin.

7. (a) A defibrillator sends a 6.00-A current through the chest of a patient by applying a 10,000-V potential as in the figure below. What is the resistance of the path? (b) The defibrillator paddles make contact with the patient through a conducting gel that greatly reduces the path resistance. Discuss the difficulties that would ensue if a larger voltage were used to produce the same current through the patient, but with the path having perhaps 50 times the resistance. (Hint: The current must be about the same, so a higher voltage would imply greater power. Use this equation for power:  )

8. During open-heart surgery, a defibrillator can be used to bring a patient out of cardiac arrest. The resistance of the path is  and a  current is needed. What voltage should be applied?   
9. (a) A defibrillator passes 12.0 A of current through the torso of a person for 0.0100 s. How much charge moves? (b) How many electrons pass through the wires connected to the patient? (See figure two problems earlier.)   
10. A clock battery wears out after moving 10,000 C of charge through the clock at a rate of  . (a) How long did the clock run? (b) How many electrons per second flowed?   
11. The batteries of a submerged non-nuclear submarine supply 1000 A at full speed ahead. How long does it take to move Avogadro’s number  ) of electrons at this rate?   
12. Electron guns are used in X-ray tubes. The electrons are accelerated through a relatively large voltage and directed onto a metal target, producing X-rays. (a) How many electrons per second strike the target if the current is 0.500 mA? (b) What charge strikes the target in 0.750 s?   
13. A large cyclotron directs a beam of  nuclei onto a target with a beam current of  . (a) How many  nuclei per second is this? (b) How long does it take for 1.00 C to strike the target? (c) How long before 1.00 mol of nuclei strike the target?   
14. Repeat the above example on Example 20.3, but for a wire made of silver and given there is one free electron per silver atom.   
15. Using the results of the above example on Example 20.3, find the drift velocity in a copper wire of twice the diameter and carrying  .   
16. A 14-gauge copper wire has a diameter of 1.628 mm. What magnitude current flows when the drift velocity is  (See above example on Example 20.3 for useful information.)   
17. SPEAR, a storage ring about  in diameter at the Stanford Linear Accelerator (closed in 2009), has a 20.0-A circulating beam of electrons that are moving at nearly the speed of light. (See Figure 20.35.) How many electrons are in the beam?

20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits

18. What current flows through the bulb of a 3.00-V flashlight when its hot resistance is    
19. Calculate the effective resistance of a pocket calculator that has a 1.35-V battery and through which  flows.   
20. What is the effective resistance of a car’s starter motor when 150 A flows through it as the car battery applies  to the motor?   
21. How many volts are supplied to operate an indicator light on a DVD player that has a resistance of  , given that 25.0 mA passes through it?   
22. (a) Find the voltage drop in an extension cord having a resistance and through which 5.00 A is flowing. (b) A cheaper cord utilizes thinner wire and has a resistance of  . What is the voltage drop in it when 5.00 A flows? (c) Why is the voltage to whatever appliance is being used reduced by this amount? What is the effect on the appliance?   
23. A power transmission line is hung from metal towers with glass insulators having a resistance of  What current flows through the insulator if the voltage is  (Some highvoltage lines are DC.)

20.3 Resistance and Resistivity

24. What is the resistance of a  -long piece of 12-gauge copper wire having a 2.053-mm diameter?   
25. The diameter of 0-gauge copper wire is 8.252 mm. Find the resistance of a 1.00-km length of such wire used for power transmission.   
26. If the  diameter tungsten filament in a light bulb is to have a resistance of  at  , how long should it be?   
27. Find the ratio of the diameter of aluminum to copper wire, if they have the same resistance per unit length (as they might in household wiring).   
28. What current flows through a 2.54-cm-diameter rod of pure silicon that is  long, when  is applied to it? (Such a rod may be used to make nuclear-particle detectors, for example.)   
29. (a) To what temperature must you raise a copper wire, originally at  , to double its resistance, neglecting any changes in dimensions? (b) Does this happen in household wiring under ordinary circumstances?   
30. A resistor made of Nichrome wire is used in an application where its resistance cannot change more than  from its value at  . Over what temperature range can it be used?   
31. Of what material is a resistor made if its resistance is  greater at  than at    
32. An electronic device designed to operate at any temperature in the range from  to  contains pure carbon resistors. By what factor does their resistance increase over this range?   
33. (a) Of what material is a wire made, if it is  long with a  diameter and has a resistance of  at  (b) What is its resistance at    
34. Assuming a constant temperature coefficient of resistivity, what is the maximum percent decrease in the resistance of a constantan wire starting at    
35. A wire is drawn through a die, stretching it to four times its original length. By what factor does its resistance increase?   
36. A copper wire has a resistance of  at  and an iron wire has a resistance of  at the same temperature. At what temperature are their resistances equal?   
37. (a) Digital medical thermometers determine temperature by measuring the resistance of a semiconductor device called a thermistor (which has  when it is at the same temperature as the patient. What is a patient’s temperature if the thermistor’s resistance at that temperature is  of its value at  (normal body temperature)? (b) The negative value for  may not be maintained for very low temperatures. Discuss why and whether this is the case here. (Hint: Resistance can’t become negative.)

38. Integrated Concepts (a) Redo Exercise 9.25 taking into account the thermal expansion of the tungsten filament. You may assume a thermal expansion coefficient of × . (b) By what percentage does your answer differ from that in the example?

39. Unreasonable Results (a) To what temperature must you raise a resistor made of constantan to double its resistance, assuming a constant temperature coefficient of resistivity? (b) To cut it in half? (c) What is unreasonable about these results? (d) Which assumptions are unreasonable, or which premises are inconsistent?

20.4 Electric Power and Energy

40. What is the power of a  lightning bolt having a current of  ?   
41. What power is supplied to the starter motor of a large truck that draws 250 A of current from a  battery hookup?   
42. A charge of 4.00 C of charge passes through a pocket calculator’s solar cells in  . What is the power output, given the calculator’s voltage output is 3.00 V? (See Figure 20.36.)   
43. How many watts does a flashlight that has  pass through it in  use if its voltage is 3.00 V?   
44. Find the power dissipated in each of these extension cords: (a) an extension cord having a  resistance and through which 5.00 A is flowing; (b) a cheaper cord utilizing thinner wire and with a resistance of  ·   
45. Verify that the units of a volt-ampere are watts, as implied by the equation  .   
46. Show that the units  , as implied by the equation  .   
47. Show that the units  , as implied by the equation  .   
48. Verify the energy unit equivalence that  .   
49. Electrons in an X-ray tube are accelerated through  and directed toward a target to produce X-rays. Calculate the power of the electron beam in this tube if it has a current of  .   
50. An electric water heater consumes  for  per day. What is the cost of running it for one year if electricity costs  ? See Figure 20.37.

51. With a 1200-W toaster, how much electrical energy is needed to make a slice of toast (cooking time  minute)? At  , how much does this cost?

52. What would be the maximum cost of a CFL such that the total cost (investment plus operating) would be the same for both CFL and incandescent 60-W bulbs? Assume the cost of the incandescent bulb is 25 cents and that electricity costs . Calculate the cost for 1000 hours, as in the cost effectiveness of CFL example.   
53. Some makes of older cars have 6.00-V electrical systems. (a) What is the hot resistance of a 30.0-W headlight in such a car? (b) What current flows through it?   
54. Alkaline batteries have the advantage of putting out constant voltage until very nearly the end of their life. How long will an alkaline battery rated at  and 1.58 V keep a 1.00-W flashlight bulb burning?   
55. A cauterizer, used to stop bleeding in surgery, puts out  at  (a) What is its power output? (b) What is the resistance of the path?   
56. The average television is said to be on 6 hours per day. Estimate the yearly cost of electricity to operate 100 million TVs, assuming their power consumption averages 150 W and the cost of electricity averages .   
57. An old lightbulb draws only 50.0 W, rather than its original 60.0 W, due to evaporative thinning of its filament. By what factor is its diameter reduced, assuming uniform thinning along its length? Neglect any effects caused by temperature differences.   
58. 00-gauge copper wire has a diameter of 9.266 mm. Calculate the power loss in a kilometer of such wire when it carries  .

59. Integrated Concepts

Cold vaporizers pass a current through water, evaporating it with only a small increase in temperature. One such home device is rated at 3.50 A and utilizes 120 V AC with  efficiency. (a) What is the vaporization rate in grams per minute? (b) How much water must you put into the vaporizer for  of overnight operation? (See Figure 20.38.)

60. Integrated Concepts

(a) What energy is dissipated by a lightning bolt having a 20,000-A current, a voltage of  , and a length of  (b) What mass of tree sap could be raised from  to its boiling point and then evaporated by this energy, assuming sap has the same thermal characteristics as water?

61. Integrated Concepts What current must be produced by a  battery-operated bottle warmer in order to heat  of glass,  of baby formula, and  of aluminum from  to  in 5.00 min?

62. Integrated Concepts How much time is needed for a surgical cauterizer to raise the temperature of  of tissue from  to  and then boil away  of water, if it puts out  at  Ignore heat transfer to the surroundings.

63. Integrated Concepts

Hydroelectric generators (see Figure 20.39) at Hoover Dam produce a maximum current of  at  (a) What is the power output? (b) The water that powers the generators enters and leaves the system at low speed (thus its kinetic energy does not change) but loses 160 m in altitude. How many cubic meters per second are needed, assuming  efficiency?

64. Integrated Concepts

(a) Assuming  efficiency for the conversion of electrical power by the motor, what current must the  batteries of a  electric car be able to supply: (a) To accelerate from rest to  in  (b) To climb a -high hill in 2.00 min at a constant  speed while exerting  of force to overcome air resistance and friction? (c) To travel at a constant  speed, exerting a  force to overcome air resistance and friction? See Figure 20.40.

65. Integrated Concepts

A light-rail commuter train draws 630 A of  DC electricity when accelerating. (a) What is its power consumption rate in kilowatts? (b) How long does it take to reach  starting from rest if its loaded mass is  , assuming  efficiency and constant power? (c) Find its average acceleration. (d) Discuss how the acceleration you found for the light-rail train compares to what might be typical for an automobile.

66. Integrated Concepts (a) An aluminum power transmission line has a resistance of  . What is its mass per kilometer? (b) What is the mass per kilometer of a copper line having the same resistance? A lower resistance would shorten the heating time. Discuss the practical limits to speeding the heating by lowering the resistance.

67. Integrated Concepts (a) An immersion heater utilizing  can raise the temperature of a  aluminum cup containing  of water from  to  in  . Find its resistance, assuming it is constant during the process. (b) A lower resistance would shorten the heating time. Discuss the practical limits to speeding the heating by lowering the resistance.   
68. Integrated Concepts (a) What is the cost of heating a hot tub containing  of water from  to  , assuming  efficiency to account for heat transfer to the surroundings? The cost of electricity is  . (b) What current was used by the 220-V AC electric heater, if this took    
69. Unreasonable Results (a) What current is needed to transmit  of power at 480 V? (b) What power is dissipated by the transmission lines if they have a  resistance? (c) What is unreasonable about this result? (d) Which assumptions are unreasonable, or which premises are inconsistent?   
70. Unreasonable Results (a) What current is needed to transmit  of power at  (b) Find the resistance of  of wire that would cause a  power loss. (c) What is the diameter of a  -long copper wire having this resistance? (d) What is unreasonable about these results? (e) Which assumptions are unreasonable, or which premises are inconsistent?

71. Construct Your Own Problem

Consider an electric immersion heater used to heat a cup of water to make tea. Construct a problem in which you calculate the needed resistance of the heater so that it increases the temperature of the water and cup in a reasonable amount of time. Also calculate the cost of the electrical energy used in your process. Among the things to be considered are the voltage used, the masses and heat capacities involved, heat losses, and the time over which the heating takes place. Your instructor may wish for you to consider a thermal safety switch (perhaps bimetallic) that will halt the process before damaging temperatures are reached in the immersion unit.

20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct Current

72. (a) What is the hot resistance of a 25-W light bulb that runs on 120-V AC? (b) If the bulb’s operating temperature is  , what is its resistance at    
73. Certain heavy industrial equipment uses AC power that has a peak voltage of  What is the rms voltage?   
74. A certain circuit breaker trips when the rms current is 15.0 A. What is the corresponding peak current?   
75. Military aircraft use 400-Hz AC power, because it is possible to design lighter-weight equipment at this higher frequency. What is the time for one complete cycle of this power?   
76. A North American tourist takes his 25.0-W, 120-V AC razor to Europe, finds a special adapter, and plugs it into 240 V AC. Assuming constant resistance, what power does the razor consume as it is ruined?   
77. In this problem, you will verify statements made at the end of the power losses for Example 20.10. (a) What current is needed to transmit 100 MW of power at a voltage of  (b) Find the power loss in a  transmission line. (c) What percent loss does this represent?   
78. A small office-building air conditioner operates on 408-V AC and consumes  . (a) What is its effective resistance? (b) What is the cost of running the air conditioner during a hot summer month when it is on  per day for 30 days and electricity costs ?   
79. What is the peak power consumption of a 120-V AC microwave oven that draws 10.0 A?   
80. What is the peak current through a 500-W room heater that operates on 120-V AC power?

81. Two different electrical devices have the same power consumption, but one is meant to be operated on 120-V AC and the other on 240-V AC. (a) What is the ratio of their resistances? (b) What is the ratio of their currents? (c) Assuming its resistance is unaffected, by what factor will the power increase if a 120-V AC device is connected to 240-V AC?

82. Nichrome wire is used in some radiative heaters. (a) Find the resistance needed if the average power output is to be  utilizing 120-V AC. (b) What length of Nichrome wire, having a crosssectional area of  , is needed if the operating temperature is  (c) What power will it draw when first switched on?   
83. Find the time after  when the instantaneous voltage of  first reaches the following values: (a)  (b)  (c) 0.   
84. (a) At what two times in the first period following  does the instantaneous voltage in 60-Hz AC equal  (b)  ?

20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body

85. (a) How much power is dissipated in a short circuit of 220-V AC through a resistance of  (b) What current flows?   
86. What voltage is involved in a 1.44-kW short circuit through a  resistance?   
87. Find the current through a person and identify the likely effect on her if she touches a 120-V AC source: (a) if she is standing on a rubber mat and offers a total resistance of  ; (b) if she is standing barefoot on wet grass and has a resistance of only  .   
88. While taking a bath, a person touches the metal case of a radio. The path through the person to the drainpipe and ground has a resistance of  . What is the smallest voltage on the case of the radio that could cause ventricular fibrillation?   
89. Foolishly trying to fish a burning piece of bread from a toaster with a metal butter knife, a man comes into contact with 120-V AC. He does not even feel it since, luckily, he is wearing rubbersoled shoes. What is the minimum resistance of the path the current follows through the person?   
90. (a) During surgery, a current as small as  applied directly to the heart may cause ventricular fibrillation. If the resistance of the exposed heart is  , what is the smallest voltage that poses this danger? (b) Does your answer imply that special electrical safety precautions are needed?

91. (a) What is the resistance of a 220-V AC short circuit that generates a peak power of 96.8 kW? (b) What would the average power be if the voltage was 120 V AC?

92. A heart defibrillator passes 10.0 A through a patient’s torso for 5.00 ms in an attempt to restore normal beating. (a) How much charge passed? (b) What voltage was applied if 500 J of energy was dissipated? (c) What was the path’s resistance? (d) Find the temperature increase caused in the 8.00 kg of affected tissue.

93. Integrated Concepts A short circuit in a 120-V appliance cord has a resistance. Calculate the temperature rise of the  of surrounding materials, assuming their specific heat capacity is  and that it takes 0.0500 s for a circuit breaker to interrupt the current. Is this likely to be damaging?

94. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a person working in an environment where electric currents might pass through their body. Construct a problem in which you calculate the resistance of insulation needed to protect the person from harm. Among the things to be considered are the voltage to which the person might be exposed, likely body resistance (dry, wet, …), and acceptable currents (safe but sensed, safe and unfelt, …).

20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

95. Integrated Concepts Use the ECG in Figure 20.31 to determine the heart rate in beats per minute assuming a constant time between beats.   
96. Integrated Concepts (a) Referring to Figure 20.31, find the time systolic pressure lags behind the middle of the QRS complex. (b) Discuss the reasons for the time lag.   
97. Critical Thinking A copper wire of length  is in a circuit. A current of 2.50 A flows through the wire. (a) Initially, the circuit is at  . If there is an energy loss of 3.25 MJ in the first second caused by the wire as soon as the circuit is turned on, what is the radius of the wire? (b) After the wire heats  , how much energy is being dissipated by the circuit per second? Neglect the effects of thermal expansion since the wire is considered to be physically constrained from expanding. Assume the current is maintained. (c) At what temperature will the energy dissipation be  higher than it was at the beginning of the experiment?