14.7 Radiation

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Discuss heat transfer by radiation.   
• Explain the power of different materials.

You can feel the heat transfer from a fire and from the Sun. Similarly, you can sometimes tell that the oven is hot without touching its door or looking inside—it may just warm you as you walk by. The space between the Earth and the Sun is largely empty, without any possibility of heat transfer by convection or conduction. In these examples, heat is transferred by radiation. That is, the hot body emits electromagnetic waves that are absorbed by our skin: no medium is required for electromagnetic waves to propagate. Different names are used for electromagnetic waves of different wavelengths: radio waves, microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, X-rays, and gamma rays.

The energy of electromagnetic radiation depends on the wavelength (color) and varies over a wide range: a smaller wavelength (or higher frequency) corresponds to a higher energy. Because more heat is radiated at higher temperatures, a temperature change is accompanied by a color change. Take, for example, an electrical element on a stove, which glows from red to orange, while the higher-temperature steel in a blast furnace glows from yellow to white. The radiation you feel is mostly infrared, which corresponds to a lower temperature than that of the electrical element and the steel. The radiated energy depends on its intensity, which is represented in the figure below by the height of the distribution.

Electromagnetic Waves explains more about the electromagnetic spectrum and Introduction to Quantum Physics discusses how the decrease in wavelength corresponds to an increase in energy.

All objects absorb and emit electromagnetic radiation. The rate of heat transfer by radiation is largely determined by the color of the object. Black is the most effective, and white is the least effective. People living in hot climates generally avoid wearing black clothing, for instance. Similarly, black asphalt in a parking lot will be hotter than adjacent gray sidewalk on a summer day, because black absorbs better than gray. The reverse is also true—black radiates better than gray. Thus, on a clear summer night, the asphalt will be colder than the gray sidewalk, because black radiates the energy more rapidly than gray. An idealradiatoris the same color as an idealabsorber, and captures all the radiation that falls on it. In contrast, white is a poor absorber and is also a poor radiator. A white object reflects all radiation, like a mirror. (A perfect, polished white surface is mirror-like in appearance, and a crushed mirror looks white.)

Gray objects have a uniform ability to absorb all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. Colored objects behave in similar but more complex ways, which gives them a particular color in the visible range and may make them special in other ranges of the nonvisible spectrum. Take, for example, the strong absorption of infrared radiation by the skin, which allows us to be very sensitive to it.

The rate of heat transfer by emitted radiation is determined by the Stefan-Boltzmann law of radiation:

where  is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant,  is the surface area of the object, and  is its absolute temperature in kelvin. The symbol  stands for the emissivity of the object, which is a measure of how well it radiates. An ideal jet-black (or black body) radiator has  , whereas a perfect reflector has  . Real objects fall between these two values. Take, for example, tungsten light bulb filaments which have an  of about , and carbon black (a material used in printer toner), which has the (greatest known) emissivity of about .

The radiation rate is directly proportional to the fourthpowerof the absolute temperature—a remarkably strong temperature dependence. Furthermore, the radiated heat is proportional to the surface area of the object. If you knock apart the coals of a fire, there is a noticeable increase in radiation due to an increase in radiating surface area.

Skin is a remarkably good absorber and emitter of infrared radiation, having an emissivity of 0.97 in the infrared spectrum. Thus, we are all nearly (jet) black in the infrared, in spite of the obvious variations in skin color. This high infrared emissivity is why we can so easily feel radiation on our skin. It is also the basis for the use of night scopes used by law enforcement and the military to detect human beings. Even small temperature variations can be detected because of the  dependence. Images, called thermographs, can be used medically to detect regions of abnormally high temperature in the body, perhaps indicative of disease. Similar techniques can be used to detect heat leaks in homes Figure 14.27, optimize performance of blast furnaces, improve comfort levels in work environments, and even remotely map the Earth’s temperature profile.

All objects emit and absorb radiation. The netrate of heat transfer by radiation (absorption minus emission) is related to both the temperature of the object and the temperature of its surroundings. Assuming that an object with a temperature  is surrounded by an environment with uniform temperature  , the net rate of heat transfer by radiation is

where  is the emissivity of the object alone. In other words, it does not matter whether the surroundings are white, gray, or black; the balance of radiation into and out of the object depends on how well it emits and absorbs radiation. When  , the quantity  is positive; that is, the net heat transfer is from hot to cold.

Take-Home Experiment: Temperature in the Sun

Place a thermometer out in the sunshine and shield it from direct sunlight using an aluminum foil. What is the reading? Now remove the shield, and note what the thermometer reads. Take a handkerchief soaked in nail polish remover, wrap it around the thermometer and place it in the sunshine. What does the thermometer read?

EXAMPLE 14.9

Calculate the Net Heat Transfer of a Person: Heat Transfer by Radiation

What is the rate of heat transfer by radiation, with an unclothed person standing in a dark room whose ambient temperature is  . The person has a normal skin temperature of  and a surface area of  . The emissivity of skin is 0.97 in the infrared, where the radiation takes place.

Strategy

We can solve this by using the equation for the rate of radiative heat transfer.

Solution

Insert the temperatures values  and  , so that

Discussion

This value is a significant rate of heat transfer to the environment (note the minus sign), considering that a person at rest may produce energy at the rate of 125 W and that conduction and convection will also be transferring energy to the environment. Indeed, we would probably expect this person to feel cold. Clothing significantly reduces heat transfer to the environment by many methods, because clothing slows down both conduction and convection, and has a lower emissivity (especially if it is white) than skin.

The Earth receives almost all its energy from radiation of the Sun and reflects some of it back into outer space. Because the Sun is hotter than the Earth, the net energy flux is from the Sun to the Earth. However, the rate of energy transfer is less than the equation for the radiative heat transfer would predict because the Sun does not fill the sky. The average emissivity ( ) of the Earth is about 0.65, but the calculation of this value is complicated by the fact that the highly reflective cloud coverage varies greatly from day to day. There is a negative feedback (one in which a change produces an effect that opposes that change) between clouds and heat transfer; greater temperatures evaporate more water to form more clouds, which reflect more radiation back into space, reducing the temperature. The often mentioned greenhouse effect is directly related to the variation of the Earth’s emissivity with radiation type (see the figure given below). The greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon responsible for providing temperatures suitable for life on Earth. The Earth’s relatively constant temperature is a result of the energy balance between the incoming solar radiation and the energy radiated from the Earth. Most of the infrared radiation emitted from the Earth is absorbed by carbon dioxide  ) and water  in the atmosphere and then re-radiated back to the Earth or into outer space. Re-radiation back to the Earth maintains its surface temperature about  higher than it would be if there was no atmosphere, similar to the way glass increases temperatures in a greenhouse.

The greenhouse effect and its causes were first predicted by Eunice Newton Foote after she designed and conducted experiments on heating of different gases. After filling flasks with carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and regular air, then also modifying moisture, she placed them in the sun and carefully measured their heating and, especially, their heat retention. She discovered that the  flask gained the most temperature and held it the longest. After subsequent research, her paper "Circumstances affecting the Heat of the Sun’s Rays" included conclusions that an atmosphere consisting of more carbon dioxide would be hotter resulting from the gas trapping radiation.

The greenhouse effect is also central to the discussion of global warming due to emission of carbon dioxide and methane (and other so-called greenhouse gases) into the Earth’s atmosphere from industrial production and farming. Changes in global climate could lead to more intense storms, precipitation changes (affecting agriculture), reduction in rain forest biodiversity, and rising sea levels.

Heating and cooling are often significant contributors to energy use in individual homes. Mária Telkes, a Hungarianborn American scientist, was among the foremost developers of solar energy applications in industrial and community use. After inventing a widely deployed solar seawater distiller used on World War II life rafts, she partnered with architect Eleanor Raymond to design the first modern home to be completely heated by solar power. Air warmed on rooftop collectors transferred heat to salts, which stored the heat for later use. Telkes later worked with the Department of Energy to develop the first solar-electrically powered home. Current research efforts into developing environmentally friendly homes quite often focus on reducing conventional heating and cooling through better building materials, strategically positioning windows to optimize radiation gain from the Sun, and opening spaces to allow convection. It is possible to build a zero-energy house that allows for comfortable living in most

parts of the United States with hot and humid summers and cold winters.

Conversely, dark space is very cold, about  , so that the Earth radiates energy into the dark sky. Owing to the fact that clouds have lower emissivity than either oceans or land masses, they reflect some of the radiation back to the surface, greatly reducing heat transfer into dark space, just as they greatly reduce heat transfer into the atmosphere during the day. The rate of heat transfer from soil and grasses can be so rapid that frost may occur on clear summer evenings, even in warm latitudes.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

What is the change in the rate of the radiated heat by a body at the temperature  compared to when the body is at the temperature 

Solution

The radiated heat is proportional to the fourth power of the absolutetemperature. Because  and  , the rate of heat transfer increases by about 30 percent of the original rate.

Career Connection: Energy Conservation Consultation

The cost of energy is generally believed to remain very high for the foreseeable future. Thus, passive control of heat loss in both commercial and domestic housing will become increasingly important. Energy consultants measure and analyze the flow of energy into and out of houses and ensure that a healthy exchange of air is maintained inside the house. The job prospects for an energy consultant are strong.

Problem-Solving Strategies for the Methods of Heat Transfer

1. Examinethesituationtodeterminewhattypeofheattransferisinvolved.   
2. Identifythetype(s)ofheattransfer—conduction,convection,orradiation.   
3. Identifyexactlywhatne dstobedeterminedintheproblem(identifytheunknowns).Awritenlistisvery useful.   
4. Makealistofwhatisgivenorcanbeinferedfromtheproblemasstated(identifytheknowns).   
5. Solvetheap ropriateequationforthequantitytobedetermined(theunknown).   
6. For conduction, equation  is appropriate. Table 14.3 lists thermal conductivities. For convection, determine the amount of matter moved and use equation  , to calculate the heat transfer involved in the temperature change of the fluid. If a phase change accompanies convection, equation  or  is appropriate to find the heat transfer involved in the phase change. Table 14.2 lists information relevant to phase change. For radiation, equation gives the

net heat transfer rate. 7. Inserttheknownsalongwiththeirunitsintotheap ropriateequationandobtainnumericalsolutions completewithunits. 8. Checktheanswertose ifitisreasonable.Doesitmakesense?

Glossary

conduction heat transfer through stationary matter by physical contact   
convection heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of fluid   
emissivity measure of how well an object radiates   
greenhouse effect warming of the Earth that is due to gases such as carbon dioxide and methane that absorb infrared radiation from the Earth’s surface and reradiate it in all directions, thus sending a fraction of it back toward the surface of the Earth   
heat the spontaneous transfer of energy due to a temperature difference   
heat of sublimation the energy required to change a substance from the solid phase to the vapor phase   
kilocalorie  calories   
latent heat coefficient a physical constant equal to the amount of heat transferred for every  of a substance during the change in phase of the substance   
mechanical equivalent of heat the work needed to produce the same effects as heat transfer   
net rate of heat transfer by radiation is Qnet = geA(T4 -T4)   
Rfactor the ratio of thickness to the conductivity of a material   
radiation energy transferred by electromagnetic waves directly as a result of a temperature difference   
radiation heat transfer which occurs when microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, or other electromagnetic radiation is emitted or absorbed   
rate of conductive heat transfer rate of heat transfer from one material to another   
specific heat the amount of heat necessary to change the temperature of  of a substance by 1.00    
Stefan-Boltzmann law of radiation  where  is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant,  is the surface area of the object,  is the absolute temperature, and  is the emissivity   
sublimation the transition from the solid phase to the vapor phase   
thermal conductivity the property of a material’s ability to conduct heat

Section Summary

14.1 Heat

• Heat and work are the two distinct methods of energy transfer.   
• Heat is energy transferred solely due to a temperature difference.   
Any energy unit can be used for heat transfer, and the most common are kilocalorie (kcal) and joule (J).   
Kilocalorie is defined to be the energy needed to change the temperature of  of water between  and  . The mechanical equivalent of this heat transfer is 

14.2 Temperature Change and Heat Capacity

The transfer of heat  that leads to a change  in the temperature of a body with mass  is  , where  is the specific heat of the material. This relationship can also be considered as the definition of specific heat.

14.3 Phase Change and Latent Heat

• Most substances can exist either in solid, liquid, and gas forms, which are referred to as “phases.”

• Phase changes occur at fixed temperatures for a given substance at a given pressure, and these temperatures are called boiling and freezing (or melting) points.   
• During phase changes, heat absorbed or released is given by:  ， where  is the latent heat coefficient.

14.4 Heat Transfer Methods

• Heat is transferred by three different methods: conduction, convection, and radiation.

14.5 Conduction

• Heat conduction is the transfer of heat between two objects in direct contact with each other.   
• The rate of heat transfer  (energy per unit time) is proportional to the temperature difference  and the contact area  and inversely proportional to the distance  between the objects: 

14.6 Convection

• Convection is heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of mass. Convection can be natural or forced and generally transfers thermal energy faster than conduction. Table 14.4 gives wind-chill factors, indicating that moving air has the same chilling effect of much colder stationary air. Convectionthatoc ursalongwithaphasechange can transfer energy from cold regions to warm ones.

14.7 Radiation

• Radiation is the rate of heat transfer through the emission or absorption of electromagnetic waves. • The rate of heat transfer depends on the surface area and the fourth power of the absolute temperature:

Conceptual Questions

14.1 Heat

1. How is heat transfer related to temperature?   
2. Describe a situation in which heat transfer occurs. What are the resulting forms of energy?   
3. When heat transfers into a system, is the energy stored as heat? Explain briefly.

14.2 Temperature Change and Heat Capacity

4. What three factors affect the heat transfer that is necessary to change an object’s temperature?   
5. The brakes in a car increase in temperature by  when bringing the car to rest from a speed  . How much greater would  be if the car initially had twice the speed? You may assume the car to stop sufficiently fast so that no heat transfers out of the brakes.

14.3 Phase Change and Latent Heat

6. Heat transfer can cause temperature and phase changes. What else can cause these changes?   
7. How does the latent heat of fusion of water help slow the decrease of air temperatures, perhaps preventing temperatures from falling significantly below  , in the vicinity of large bodies of water?   
8. What is the temperature of ice right after it is formed by freezing water?   
9. If you place  ice into  water in an insulated container, what will happen? Will some ice melt, will more water freeze, or will neither take place?   
10. What effect does condensation on a glass of ice water have on the rate at which the ice melts? Will the condensation speed up the melting process or slow it down?    
where  is the   
Stefan-Boltzmann constant and  is the emissivity of the body. For a black body,  whereas a shiny white or perfect reflector has  , with real objects having values of  between 1 and 0. The net rate of heat transfer by radiation is   
   
where  is the temperature of an object   
surrounded by an environment with uniform   
temperature  and  is the emissivity of the   
object.   
11. In very humid climates where there are numerous bodies of water, such as in Florida, it is unusual for temperatures to rise above about  . In deserts, however, temperatures can rise far above this. Explain how the evaporation of water helps limit high temperatures in humid climates.   
12. In winters, it is often warmer in San Francisco than in nearby Sacramento,  inland. In summers, it is nearly always hotter in Sacramento. Explain how the bodies of water surrounding San Francisco moderate its extreme temperatures.   
13. Putting a lid on a boiling pot greatly reduces the heat transfer necessary to keep it boiling. Explain why.   
14. Freeze-dried foods have been dehydrated in a vacuum. During the process, the food freezes and must be heated to facilitate dehydration. Explain both how the vacuum speeds up dehydration and why the food freezes as a result.   
15. When still air cools by radiating at night, it is unusual for temperatures to fall below the dew point. Explain why.   
16. In a physics classroom demonstration, an instructor inflates a balloon by mouth and then cools it in liquid nitrogen. When cold, the shrunken balloon has a small amount of light blue liquid in it, as well as some snow-like crystals. As it warms up, the liquid boils, and part of the crystals sublimate, with some crystals lingering for awhile and then producing a liquid. Identify the blue liquid and the two solids in the cold balloon. Justify your identifications using data from Table 14.2.

14.4 Heat Transfer Methods

17. What are the main methods of heat transfer from the hot core of Earth to its surface? From Earth’s surface to outer space?   
18. When our bodies get too warm, they respond by sweating and increasing blood circulation to the surface to transfer thermal energy away from the core. What effect will this have on a person in a  hot tub?   
19. Figure 14.30 shows a cut-away drawing of a thermos bottle (also known as a Dewar flask), which is a device designed specifically to slow down all forms of heat transfer. Explain the functions of the various parts, such as the vacuum, the silvering of the walls, the thin-walled long glass neck, the rubber support, the air layer, and the stopper.

14.5 Conduction

20. Some electric stoves have a flat ceramic surface with heating elements hidden beneath. A pot placed over a heating element will be heated, while it is safe to touch the surface only a few centimeters away. Why is ceramic, with a conductivity less than that of a metal but greater than that of a good insulator, an ideal choice for the stove top?

21. Loose-fitting white clothing covering most of the body is ideal for desert dwellers, both in the hot Sun and during cold evenings. Explain how such clothing is advantageous during both day and night.

14.6 Convection

22. One way to make a fireplace more energy efficient is to have an external air supply for the combustion of its fuel. Another is to have room air circulate around the outside of the fire box and back into the room. Detail the methods of heat transfer involved in each.   
23. On cold, clear nights horses will sleep under the cover of large trees. How does this help them keep warm?

14.7 Radiation

24. When watching a daytime circus in a large, darkcolored tent, you sense significant heat transfer from the tent. Explain why this occurs.   
25. Satellites designed to observe the radiation from cold (3 K) dark space have sensors that are shaded from the Sun, Earth, and Moon and that are cooled to very low temperatures. Why must the sensors be at low temperature?   
26. Why are cloudy nights generally warmer than clear ones?

27. Why are thermometers that are used in weather stations shielded from the sunshine? What does a thermometer measure if it is shielded from the sunshine and also if it is not?

28. On average, would Earth be warmer or cooler without the atmosphere? Explain your answer.

Problems & Exercises

14.2 Temperature Change and Heat Capacity

1. On a hot day, the temperature of an 80,000-L swimming pool increases by  . What is the net heat transfer during this heating? Ignore any complications, such as loss of water by evaporation.   
2. Show that  .   
3. To sterilize a  glass baby bottle, we must raise its temperature from  to  . How much heat transfer is required?   
4. The same heat transfer into identical masses of different substances produces different temperature changes. Calculate the final temperature when  of heat transfers into  of the following, originally at  : (a) water; (b) concrete; (c) steel; and (d) mercury.   
5. Rubbing your hands together warms them by converting work into thermal energy. If a woman rubs her hands back and forth for a total of 20 rubs, at a distance of 7.50 cm per rub, and with an average frictional force of  , what is the temperature increase? The mass of tissues warmed is only  , mostly in the palms and fingers.   
6. A 0.250-kg block of a pure material is heated from  to  by the addition of  of energy. Calculate its specific heat and identify the substance of which it is most likely composed.   
7. Suppose identical amounts of heat transfer into different masses of copper and water, causing identical changes in temperature. What is the ratio of the mass of copper to water?   
8. (a) The number of kilocalories in food is determined by calorimetry techniques in which the food is burned and the amount of heat transfer is measured. How many kilocalories per gram are there in a  peanut if the energy from burning it is transferred to  of water held in a  aluminum cup, causing a  temperature increase? (b) Compare your answer to labeling information found on a package of peanuts and comment on whether the values are consistent.

9. Following vigorous exercise, the body temperature of an  person is  . At what rate in watts must the person transfer thermal energy to reduce the the body temperature to  in 30.0 min, assuming the body continues to produce energy at the rate of 150 W? (1 watt  joule/second or  .

10. Even when shut down after a period of normal use, a large commercial nuclear reactor transfers thermal energy at the rate of 150 MW by the radioactive decay of fission products. This heat transfer causes a rapid increase in temperature if the cooling system fails (1 watt  joule/second or  and  megawatt). (a) Calculate the rate of temperature increase in degrees Celsius per second  if the mass of the reactor core is  and it has an average specific heat of  (b) How long would it take to obtain a temperature increase of  , which could cause some metals holding the radioactive materials to melt? (The initial rate of temperature increase would be greater than that calculated here because the heat transfer is concentrated in a smaller mass. Later, however, the temperature increase would slow down because the  steel containment vessel would also begin to heat up.)

14.3 Phase Change and Latent Heat

11. How much heat transfer (in kilocalories) is required to thaw a 0.450-kg package of frozen vegetables originally at  if their heat of fusion is the same as that of water?   
12. A bag containing  ice is much more effective in absorbing energy than one containing the same amount of  water. a. How much heat transfer is necessary to raise the temperature of  of water from  to  b. How much heat transfer is required to first melt  of  ice and then raise its temperature? c. Explain how your answer supports the contention that the ice is more effective.   
13. (a) How much heat transfer is required to raise the temperature of a  aluminum pot containing  of water from  to the boiling point and then boil away  of water? (b) How long does this take if the rate of heat transfer is 500 W 1 watt  joule/second  ?   
14. The formation of condensation on a glass of ice water causes the ice to melt faster than it would otherwise. If  of condensation forms on a glass containing both water and  of ice, how many grams of the ice will melt as a result? Assume no other heat transfer occurs.   
15. On a trip, you notice that a  bag of ice lasts an average of one day in your cooler. What is the average power in watts entering the ice if it starts at  and completely melts to  water in exactly one day 1 watt  joule/second  ?   
16. On a certain dry sunny day, a swimming pool’s temperature would rise by  if not for evaporation. What fraction of the water must evaporate to carry away precisely enough energy to keep the temperature constant?   
17. (a) How much heat transfer is necessary to raise the temperature of a  piece of ice from  to  , including the energy needed for phase changes? (b) How much time is required for each stage, assuming a constant  rate of heat transfer? (c) Make a graph of temperature versus time for this process.

18. In 1986, a gargantuan iceberg broke away from the Ross Ice Shelf in Antarctica. It was approximately a rectangle  long,  wide, and  thick. (a) What is the mass of this iceberg, given that the density of ice is  ? (b) How much heat transfer (in joules) is needed to melt it? (c) How many years would it take sunlight alone to melt ice this thick, if the ice absorbs an average of  ,  per day?

19. How many grams of coffee must evaporate from  of coffee in a 100-g glass cup to cool the coffee from  to  You may assume the coffee has the same thermal properties as water and that the average heat of vaporization is  . (You may neglect the change in mass of the coffee as it cools, which will give you an answer that is slightly larger than correct.)

20. (a) It is difficult to extinguish a fire on a crude oil tanker, because each liter of crude oil releases  of energy when burned. To illustrate this difficulty, calculate the number of liters of water that must be expended to absorb the energy released by burning 1.00 L of crude oil, if the water has its temperature raised from  to  , it boils, and the resulting steam is raised to  . (b) Discuss additional complications caused by the fact that crude oil has a smaller density than water.

21. The energy released from condensation in thunderstorms can be very large. Calculate the energy released into the atmosphere for a small storm of radius  , assuming that  of rain is precipitated uniformly over this area.

22. To help prevent frost damage,  of  water is sprayed onto a fruit tree. (a) How much heat transfer occurs as the water freezes? (b) How much would the temperature of the  tree decrease if this amount of heat transferred from the tree? Take the specific heat to be  , and assume that no phase change occurs.

23. A 0.250-kg aluminum bowl holding  of soup at  is placed in a freezer. What is the final temperature if  of energy is transferred from the bowl and soup, assuming the soup’s thermal properties are the same as that of water? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in Problem-Solving Strategies for the Effects of Heat Transfer.

24. A 0.0500-kg ice cube at  is placed in  of  water in a very well-insulated container. What is the final temperature?

25. If you pour  of  water onto a 1.20-kg block of ice (which is initially at  , what is the final temperature? You may assume that the water cools so rapidly that effects of the surroundings are negligible.

26. Indigenous people sometimes cook in watertight baskets by placing hot rocks into water to bring it to a boil. What mass of  rock must be placed in  of  water to bring its temperature to  , if  of water escapes as vapor from the initial sizzle? You may neglect the effects of the surroundings and take the average specific heat of the rocks to be that of granite.

27. What would be the final temperature of the pan and water in Calculating the Final Temperature When Heat Is Transferred Between Two Bodies: Pouring Cold Water in a Hot Pan if  of water was placed in the pan and  of the water evaporated immediately, leaving the remainder to come to a common temperature with the pan?

28. In some countries, liquid nitrogen is used on dairy trucks instead of mechanical refrigerators. A 3.00-hour delivery trip requires 200 L of liquid nitrogen, which has a density of  . (a) Calculate the heat transfer necessary to evaporate this amount of liquid nitrogen and raise its temperature to  . (Use  and assume it is constant over the temperature range.) This value is the amount of cooling the liquid nitrogen supplies. (b) What is this heat transfer rate in kilowatthours? (c) Compare the amount of cooling obtained from melting an identical mass of  ice with that from evaporating the liquid nitrogen.

29. Some gun fanciers make their own bullets, which involves melting and casting the lead slugs. How much heat transfer is needed to raise the temperature and melt  of lead, starting from 

14.5 Conduction

30. (a) Calculate the rate of heat conduction through house walls that are  thick and that have an average thermal conductivity twice that of glass wool. Assume there are no windows or doors. The surface area of the walls is  and their inside surface is at  , while their outside surface is at  . (b) How many 1-kW room heaters would be needed to balance the heat transfer due to conduction?

31. The rate of heat conduction out of a window on a winter day is rapid enough to chill the air next to it. To see just how rapidly the windows transfer heat by conduction, calculate the rate of conduction in watts through a  window that is  thick  if the temperatures of the inner and outer surfaces are  and  , respectively. This rapid rate will not be maintained—the inner surface will cool, and even result in frost formation.

32. Calculate the rate of heat conduction out of the human body, assuming that the core internal temperature is  , the skin temperature is  , the thickness of the tissues between averages  , and the surface area is  .

33. Suppose you stand with one foot on ceramic flooring and one foot on a wool carpet, making contact over an area of  with each foot. Both the ceramic and the carpet are  thick and are  on their bottom sides. At what rate must heat transfer occur from each foot to keep the top of the ceramic and carpet at  For ceramic, use the thermal conductivity for glass.

34. A man consumes  of food in one day, converting most of it to maintain body temperature. If he loses half this energy by evaporating water (through breathing and sweating), how many kilograms of water evaporate?

35. (a) A firewalker runs across a bed of hot coals without sustaining burns. Calculate the heat transferred by conduction into the sole of one foot of a firewalker given that the bottom of the foot is a  -thick callus with a conductivity at the low end of the range for wood and its density is  . The area of contact is  , the temperature of the coals is  , and the time in contact is  . (b) What temperature increase is produced in the  of tissue affected? (c) What effect do you think this will have on the tissue, keeping in mind that a callus is made of dead cells?

36. (a) What is the rate of heat conduction through the 3.00-cm-thick fur of a large animal having a  surface area? Assume that the animal’s skin temperature is  , that the air temperature is  , and that fur has the same thermal conductivity as air. (b) What food intake will the animal need in one day to replace this heat transfer?

37. A walrus transfers energy by conduction through its blubber at the rate of 150 W when immersed in  water. The walrus’s internal core temperature is  , and it has a surface area of  . What is the average thickness of its blubber, which has the conductivity of fatty tissues without blood?

38. Compare the rate of heat conduction through a 13.0-cm-thick wall that has an area of  and a thermal conductivity twice that of glass wool with the rate of heat conduction through a window that is  thick and that has an area of  , assuming the same temperature difference across each.

39. Suppose a person is covered head to foot by wool clothing with average thickness of 2.00 cm and is transferring energy by conduction through the clothing at the rate of 50.0 W. What is the temperature difference across the clothing, given the surface area is 

40. Some stove tops are smooth ceramic for easy cleaning. If the ceramic is  thick and heat conduction occurs through the same area and at the same rate as computed in Example 14.6, what is the temperature difference across it? Ceramic has the same thermal conductivity as glass and brick.

41. One easy way to reduce heating (and cooling) costs is to add extra insulation in the attic of a house. Suppose the house already had  of fiberglass insulation in the attic and in all the exterior surfaces. If you added an extra  of fiberglass to the attic, then by what percentage would the heating cost of the house drop? Take the single story house to be of dimensions  by  by  . Ignore air infiltration and heat loss through windows and doors.

42. (a) Calculate the rate of heat conduction through a double-paned window that has a  area and is made of two panes of 0.800-cm-thick glass separated by a 1.00-cm air gap. The inside surface temperature is  , while that on the outside is  . (Hint: There are identical temperature drops across the two glass panes. First find these and then the temperature drop across the air gap. This problem ignores the increased heat transfer in the air gap due to convection.) (b) Calculate the rate of heat conduction through a 1.60-cm-thick window of the same area and with the same temperatures. Compare your answer with that for part (a).

43. Many decisions are made on the basis of the payback period: the time it will take through savings to equal the capital cost of an investment. Acceptable payback times depend upon the business or philosophy one has. (For some industries, a payback period is as small as two years.) Suppose you wish to install the extra insulation in Exercise 9.41. If energy cost  1.00\ per square meter, then calculate the simple payback time. Take the average  for the 120 day heating season to be  .

44. For the human body, what is the rate of heat transfer by conduction through the body’s tissue with the following conditions: the tissue thickness is  , the change in temperature is  , and the skin area is  . How does this compare with the average heat transfer rate to the body resulting from an energy intake of about 2400 kcal per day? (No exercise is included.)

14.6 Convection

45. At what wind speed does  air cause the same chill factor as still air at 

46. At what temperature does still air cause the same chill factor as  air moving at 

47. The “steam” above a freshly made cup of instant coffee is really water vapor droplets condensing after evaporating from the hot coffee. What is the final temperature of  of hot coffee initially at  if  evaporates from it? The coffee is in a Styrofoam cup, so other methods of heat transfer can be neglected.

48. (a) How many kilograms of water must evaporate from a  woman to lower her body temperature by  (b) Is this a reasonable amount of water to evaporate in the form of perspiration, assuming the relative humidity of the surrounding air is low?

49. On a hot dry day, evaporation from a lake has just enough heat transfer to balance the  of incoming heat from the Sun. What mass of water evaporates in  from each square meter? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategies for the Effects of Heat Transfer.

50. One winter day, the climate control system of a large university classroom building malfunctions. As a result,  of excess cold air is brought in each minute. At what rate in kilowatts must heat transfer occur to warm this air by  (that is, to bring the air to room temperature)?

51. The Kilauea volcano in Hawaii is the world’s most active, disgorging about  of  lava per day. What is the rate of heat transfer out of Earth by convection if this lava has a density of  and eventually cools to  Assume that the specific heat of lava is the same as that of granite.

52. During heavy exercise, the body pumps 2.00 L of blood per minute to the surface, where it is cooled by  . What is the rate of heat transfer from this forced convection alone, assuming blood has the same specific heat as water and its density is 

53. A person inhales and exhales  of  air, evaporating  of water from the lungs and breathing passages with each breath. (a) How much heat transfer occurs due to evaporation in each breath? (b) What is the rate of heat transfer in watts if the person is breathing at a moderate rate of 18.0 breaths per minute? (c) If the inhaled air had a temperature of  , what is the rate of heat transfer for warming the air? (d) Discuss the total rate of heat transfer as it relates to typical metabolic rates. Will this breathing be a major form of heat transfer for this person?

54. A glass coffee pot has a circular bottom with a 9.00-cm diameter in contact with a heating element that keeps the coffee warm with a continuous heat transfer rate of 50.0 W (a) What is the temperature of the bottom of the pot, if it is  thick and the inside temperature is  (b) If the temperature of the coffee remains constant and all of the heat transfer is removed by evaporation, how many grams per minute evaporate? Take the heat of vaporization to be  .

14.7 Radiation

55. At what net rate does heat radiate from a  black roof on a night when the roof’s temperature is  and the surrounding temperature is  The emissivity of the roof is 0.900.

56. (a) Cherry-red embers in a fireplace are at  and have an exposed area of  and an emissivity of 0.980. The surrounding room has a temperature of  . If  of the radiant energy enters the room, what is the net rate of radiant heat transfer in kilowatts? (b) Does your answer support the contention that most of the heat transfer into a room by a fireplace comes from infrared radiation?

57. Radiation makes it impossible to stand close to a hot lava flow. Calculate the rate of heat transfer by radiation from  of  fresh lava into  surroundings, assuming lava’s emissivity is 1.00.

58. (a) Calculate the rate of heat transfer by radiation from a car radiator at  into a  environment, if the radiator has an emissivity of 0.750 and a  surface area. (b) Is this a significant fraction of the heat transfer by an automobile engine? To answer this, assume a horsepower of  and the efficiency of automobile engines as  .

59. Find the net rate of heat transfer by radiation from a skier standing in the shade, given the following. She is completely clothed in white (head to foot, including a ski mask), the clothes have an emissivity of 0.200 and a surface temperature of  , the surroundings are at  , and her surface area is  .

60. Suppose you walk into a sauna that has an ambient temperature of  . (a) Calculate the rate of heat transfer to you by radiation given your skin temperature is  , the emissivity of skin is 0.98, and the surface area of your body is  . (b) If all other forms of heat transfer are balanced (the net heat transfer is zero), at what rate will your body temperature increase if your mass is 

61. Thermography is a technique for measuring radiant heat and detecting variations in surface temperatures that may be medically, environmentally, or militarily meaningful.(a) What is the percent increase in the rate of heat transfer by radiation from a given area at a temperature of  compared with that at  , such as on a person’s skin? (b) What is the percent increase in the rate of heat transfer by radiation from a given area at a temperature of  compared with that at  , such as for warm and cool automobile hoods?

62. The Sun radiates like a perfect black body with an emissivity of exactly 1. (a) Calculate the surface temperature of the Sun, given that it is a sphere with a  radius that radiates  into  space. (b) How much power does the Sun radiate per square meter of its surface? (c) How much power in watts per square meter is that value at the distance of Earth,  away? (This number is called the solar constant.)

63. A large body of lava from a volcano has stopped flowing and is slowly cooling. The interior of the lava is at  , its surface is at  , and the surroundings are at  . (a) Calculate the rate at which energy is transferred by radiation from  of surface lava into the surroundings, assuming the emissivity is 1.00. (b) Suppose heat conduction to the surface occurs at the same rate. What is the thickness of the lava between the  surface and the  interior, assuming that the lava’s conductivity is the same as that of brick?

64. Calculate the temperature the entire sky would have to be in order to transfer energy by radiation at  —about the rate at which the Sun radiates when it is directly overhead on a clear day. This value is the effective temperature of the sky, a kind of average that takes account of the fact that the Sun occupies only a small part of the sky but is much hotter than the rest. Assume that the body receiving the energy has a temperature of  .

65. (a) A shirtless rider under a circus tent feels the heat radiating from the sunlit portion of the tent. Calculate the temperature of the tent canvas based on the following information: The shirtless rider’s skin temperature is  and has an emissivity of 0.970. The exposed area of skin is  . He receives radiation at the rate of 20.0 W—half what you would calculate if the entire region behind him was hot. The rest of the surroundings are at  . (b) Discuss how this situation would change if the sunlit side of the tent was nearly pure white and if the rider was covered by a white tunic.

66. Integrated Concepts One  day the relative humidity is  , and that evening the temperature drops to  , well below the dew point. (a) How many grams of water condense from each cubic meter of air? (b) How much heat transfer occurs by this condensation? (c) What temperature increase could this cause in dry air?

67. Integrated Concepts Large meteors sometimes strike the Earth, converting most of their kinetic energy into thermal energy. (a) What is the kinetic energy of a  meteor moving at  (b) If this meteor lands in a deep ocean and  of its kinetic energy goes into heating water, how many kilograms of water could it raise by  (c) Discuss how the energy of the meteor is more likely to be deposited in the ocean and the likely effects of that energy.

68. Integrated Concepts

Frozen waste from airplane toilets has sometimes been accidentally ejected at high altitude. Ordinarily it breaks up and disperses over a large area, but sometimes it holds together and strikes the ground. Calculate the mass of  ice that can be melted by the conversion of kinetic and gravitational potential energy when a  piece of frozen waste is released at  altitude while moving at  and strikes the ground at  (since less than  melts, a significant mess results).

69. Integrated Concepts (a) A large electrical power facility produces 1600 MW of “waste heat,” which is dissipated to the environment in cooling towers by warming air flowing through the towers by  . What is the necessary flow rate of air in  (b) Is your result consistent with the large cooling towers used by many large electrical power plants?

70. Integrated Concepts (a) Suppose you start a workout on a Stairmaster, producing power at the same rate as climbing 116 stairs per minute. Assuming your mass is  and your efficiency is  , how long will it take for your body temperature to rise  if all other forms of heat transfer in and out of your body are balanced? (b) Is this consistent with your experience in getting warm while exercising?

71. Integrated Concepts A  person suffering from hypothermia comes indoors and shivers vigorously. How long does it take the heat transfer to increase the person’s body temperature by  if all other forms of heat transfer are balanced?

72. Integrated Concepts In certain large geographic regions, the underlying rock is hot. Wells can be drilled and water circulated through the rock for heat transfer for the generation of electricity. (a) Calculate the heat transfer that can be extracted by cooling  of granite by  . (b) How long will this take if heat is transferred at a rate of  , assuming no heat transfers back into the  of rock by its surroundings?

73. Integrated Concepts

Heat transfers from your lungs and breathing passages by evaporating water. (a) Calculate the maximum number of grams of water that can be evaporated when you inhale  of  air with an original relative humidity of  . (Assume that body temperature is also  ) (b) How many joules of energy are required to evaporate this amount? (c) What is the rate of heat transfer in watts from this method, if you breathe at a normal resting rate of 10.0 breaths per minute?

74. Integrated Concepts (a) What is the temperature increase of water falling  over Niagara Falls? (b) What fraction must evaporate to keep the temperature constant?

75. Integrated Concepts Hot air rises because it has expanded. It then displaces a greater volume of cold air, which increases the buoyant force on it. (a) Calculate the ratio of the buoyant force to the weight of  air surrounded by  air. (b) What energy is needed to cause  of air to go from  to  (c) What gravitational potential energy is gained by this volume of air if it rises  Will this cause a significant cooling of the air?

76. Unreasonable Results (a) What is the temperature increase of an  person who consumes 2500 kcal of food in one day with  of the energy transferred as heat to the body? (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which premise or assumption is responsible?

77. Unreasonable Results An Arctic inventor surrounded by ice thinks it would be much less mechanically complex to cool a car engine by melting ice on it than by having a water-cooled system with a radiator, water pump, antifreeze, and so on. (a) If  of the energy in 1.00 gal of gasoline is converted into “waste heat” in a car engine, how many kilograms of  ice could it melt? (b) Is this a reasonable amount of ice to carry around to cool the engine for 1.00 gal of gasoline consumption? (c) What premises or assumptions are unreasonable?

78. Unreasonable Results

(a) Calculate the rate of heat transfer by conduction through a window with an area of  that is 0.750 cm thick, if its inner surface is at  and its outer surface is at  . (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which premise or assumption is responsible?

79. Unreasonable Results A meteorite  in diameter is so hot immediately after penetrating the atmosphere that it radiates  of power. (a) What is its temperature, if the surroundings are at  and it has an emissivity of 0.800? (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which premise or assumption is responsible?

80. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a new model of commercial airplane having its brakes tested as a part of the initial flight permission procedure. The airplane is brought to takeoff speed and then stopped with the brakes alone. Construct a problem in which you calculate the temperature increase of the brakes during this process. You may assume most of the kinetic energy of the airplane is converted to thermal energy in the brakes and surrounding materials, and that little escapes. Note that the brakes are expected to become so hot in this procedure that they ignite and, in order to pass the test, the airplane must be able to withstand the fire for some time without a general conflagration.

81. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a person outdoors on a cold night. Construct a problem in which you calculate the rate of heat transfer from the person by all three heat transfer methods. Make the initial circumstances such that at rest the person will have a net heat transfer and then decide how much physical activity of a chosen type is necessary to balance the rate of heat transfer. Among the things to consider are the size of the person, type of clothing, initial metabolic rate, sky conditions, amount of water evaporated, and volume of air breathed. Of course, there are many other factors to consider and your instructor may wish to guide you in the assumptions made as well as the detail of analysis and method of presenting your results.