15.1 Precipitation and Dissolution 15.2 Lewis Acids and Bases 15.3 Coupled Equilibria

INTRODUCTION The mineral fluorite,  Figure 15.1, is commonly used as a semiprecious stone in many types of jewelry because of its striking appearance. Deposits of fluorite are formed through a process called hydrothermal precipitation in which calcium and fluoride ions dissolved in groundwater combine to produce insoluble  in response to some change in solution conditions. For example, a decrease in temperature may trigger fluorite precipitation if its solubility is exceeded at the lower temperature. Because fluoride ion is a weak base, its solubility is also affected by solution pH, and so geologic or other processes that change groundwater pH will also affect the precipitation of fluorite. This chapter extends the equilibrium discussion of other chapters by addressing some additional reaction classes (including precipitation) and systems involving coupled equilibrium reactions.

15.1 Precipitation and Dissolution

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Write chemical equations and equilibrium expressions representing solubility equilibria • Carry out equilibrium computations involving solubility, equilibrium expressions, and solute concentrations

Solubility equilibria are established when the dissolution and precipitation of a solute species occur at equal rates. These equilibria underlie many natural and technological processes, ranging from tooth decay to water purification. An understanding of the factors affecting compound solubility is, therefore, essential to the effective management of these processes. This section applies previously introduced equilibrium concepts and tools to systems involving dissolution and precipitation.

The Solubility Product

Recall from the chapter on solutions that the solubility of a substance can vary from essentially zero (insoluble or sparinglysoluble) to infinity (miscible). A solute with finite solubility can yield a saturatedsolution when it is added to a solvent in an amount exceeding its solubility, resulting in a heterogeneous mixture of the saturated solution and the excess, undissolved solute. For example, a saturated solution of silver chloride is one in which the equilibrium shown below has been established.

In this solution, an excess of solid AgCl dissolves and dissociates to produce aqueous  and  ions at the same rate that these aqueous ions combine and precipitate to form solid AgCl (Figure 15.2). Because silver chloride is a sparingly soluble salt, the equilibrium concentration of its dissolved ions in the solution is relatively low.

The equilibrium constant for solubility equilibria such as this one is called the solubility product constant,  , in this case

Recall that only gases and solutes are represented in equilibrium constant expressions, so the  does not include a term for the undissolved AgCl. A listing of solubility product constants for several sparingly soluble compounds is provided in Appendix J.

EXAMPLE 15.1

Writing Equations and Solubility Products

Write the dissolution equation and the solubility product expression for each of the following slightly soluble ionic compounds:

(a) AgI, silver iodide, a solid with antiseptic properties (b)  , calcium carbonate, the active ingredient in many over-the-counter chewable antacids (c)  , magnesium hydroxide, the active ingredient in Milk of Magnesia (d)  , magnesium ammonium phosphate, an essentially insoluble substance used in tests for

magnesium

(e)  , the mineral apatite, a source of phosphate for fertilizers

Solution

Check Your Learning

Write the dissolution equation and the solubility product for each of the following slightly soluble compounds:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

Answer:

 and Solubility

The  of a slightly soluble ionic compound may be simply related to its measured solubility provided the dissolution process involves only dissociation and solvation, for example:

For cases such as these, one may derive  values from provided solubilities, or vice-versa. Calculations of this sort are most conveniently performed using a compound’s molar solubility, measured as moles of dissolved solute per liter of saturated solution.

EXAMPLE 15.2

Calculation of  from Equilibrium Concentrations

Fluorite,  , is a slightly soluble solid that dissolves according to the equation:

The concentration of  in a saturated solution of  is  What is the solubility product of fluorite?

Solution

According to the stoichiometry of the dissolution equation, the fluoride ion molarity of a  solution is equal to twice its calcium ion molarity:

Substituting the ion concentrations into the  expression gives

Check Your Learning

In a saturated solution of  , the concentration of  is  What is the solubility product for 

Answer: 

EXAMPLE 15.3

Determination of Molar Solubility from 

The  of copper(I) bromide, CuBr, is  . Calculate the molar solubility of copper bromide.

Solution

The dissolution equation and solubility product expression are

Following the ICE approach to this calculation yields the table

Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into the solubility product expression and solving for  yields

Since the dissolution stoichiometry shows one mole of copper(I) ion and one mole of bromide ion are produced for each moles of Br dissolved, the molar solubility of CuBr is 

Check Your Learning

The  of AgI is  . Calculate the molar solubility of silver iodide.

Answer: 

EXAMPLE 15.4

Determination of Molar Solubility from 

The  of calcium hydroxide,  , is  . Calculate the molar solubility of calcium hydroxide.

Solution

The dissolution equation and solubility product expression are

The ICE table for this system is

Substituting terms for the equilibrium concentrations into the solubility product expression and solving for  gives

As defined in the ICE table,  is the molarity of calcium ion in the saturated solution. The dissolution stoichiometry shows a 1:1 relation between moles of calcium ion in solution and moles of compound dissolved, and so, the molar solubility of  is 

Check Your Learning

The  of  is  . Calculate the molar solubility of lead(II) iodide.

Answer: 

EXAMPLE 15.5

Determination of  from Gram Solubility

Many of the pigments used by artists in oil-based paints (Figure 15.3) are sparingly soluble in water. For example, the solubility of the artist’s pigment chrome yellow,  , is  . Determine the solubility product for  .

Solution

Before calculating the solubility product, the provided solubility must be converted to molarity:

The dissolution equation for this compound is

The dissolution stoichiometry shows a 1:1 relation between the molar amounts of compound and its two ions, and so both  and  are equal to the molar solubility of  :

Check Your Learning

The solubility of TlCl [thallium(I) chloride], an intermediate formed when thallium is being isolated from ores, is 3.12 grams per liter at  . What is its solubility product?

Answer: 1.69 10–4

EXAMPLE 15.6

Calculating the Solubility of 

Calomel,  , is a compound composed of the diatomic ion of mercury(I),  and chloride ions,  . Although most mercury compounds are now known to be poisonous, eighteenth-century physicians used calomel as a medication. Their patients rarely suffered any mercury poisoning from the treatments because calomel has a very low solubility, as suggested by its very small  :

Calculate the molar solubility of 

Solution

The dissolution stoichiometry shows a 1:1 relation between the amount of compound dissolved and the amount of mercury(I) ions, and so the molar solubility of  is equal to the concentration of  ions

Following the ICE approach results in

Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into the solubility product expression and solving for  gives

The dissolution stoichiometry shows the molar solubility of  is equal to  or  .

Check Your Learning

Determine the molar solubility of  from its solubility product:  .

Answer: 

HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT

Using Barium Sulfate for Medical Imaging

Various types of medical imaging techniques are used to aid diagnoses of illnesses in a noninvasive manner. One such technique utilizes the ingestion of a barium compound before taking an X-ray image. A suspension of barium sulfate, a chalky powder, is ingested by the patient. Since the  of barium sulfate is  , very little of it dissolves as it coats the lining of the patient’s intestinal tract. Barium-coated areas of the digestive tract then appear on an X-ray as white, allowing for greater visual detail than a traditional X-ray (Figure 15.4).

Medical imaging using barium sulfate can be used to diagnose acid reflux disease, Crohn’s disease, and ulcers in addition to other conditions.

Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/16barium) for more information on how barium is used in medical diagnoses and which conditions it is used to diagnose.

Predicting Precipitation

The equation that describes the equilibrium between solid calcium carbonate and its solvated ions is:

It is important to realize that this equilibrium is established in any aqueous solution containing  and  ions, not just in a solution formed by saturating water with calcium carbonate. Consider, for example, mixing aqueous solutions of the soluble compounds sodium carbonate and calcium nitrate. If the concentrations of calcium and carbonate ions in the mixture do not yield a reaction quotient,  that exceeds the solubility product,  , then no precipitation will occur. If the ion concentrations yield a reaction quotient greater than the solubility product, then precipitation will occur, lowering those concentrations until equilibrium is established  . The comparison of  to  to predict precipitation is an example of the general approach to predicting the direction of a reaction first introduced in the chapter on equilibrium. For the specific case of solubility equilibria:

 : the reaction proceeds in the forward direction (solution is not saturated; no precipitation observed)  : the reaction proceeds in the reverse direction (solution is supersaturated; precipitation will occur) This predictive strategy and related calculations are demonstrated in the next few example exercises.

EXAMPLE 15.7

Precipitation of 

The first step in the preparation of magnesium metal is the precipitation of  from sea water by the addition of lime,  , a readily available inexpensive source of  ion:

The concentration of  in sea water is 0.0537 M. Will  precipitate when enough  is added to give a  of 0.0010 M?

Solution

Calculation of the reaction quotient under these conditions is shown here:

Because  is greater than  is larger than  ), the reverse reaction will proceed, precipitating magnesium hydroxide until the dissolved ion concentrations have been sufficiently lowered, so that  .

Check Your Learning

Predict whether  will precipitate from a solution with  and 

Answer: No precipitation of  ;  , which is less than 

EXAMPLE 15.8

Precipitation of AgCl

Does silver chloride precipitate when equal volumes of a  solution of  and a  solution of NaCl are mixed?

Solution

The equation for the equilibrium between solid silver chloride, silver ion, and chloride ion is:

The solubility product is  (see Appendix J).

 will precipitate if the reaction quotient calculated from the concentrations in the mixture of  and NaCl is greater than  . Because the volume doubles when equal volumes of  and NaCl solutions are mixed, each concentration is reduced to half its initial value

The reaction quotient,  , is greater than  for  , so a supersaturated solution is formed:

 will precipitate from the mixture until the dissolution equilibrium is established, with  equal to 

Check Your Learning

Will  precipitate when  of a 0.050-Msolution of  is added to  of a  solution of  (Hint: Use the dilution equation to calculate the concentrations of potassium and perchlorate ions in the mixture.)

Answer: No,  , which is less than 

EXAMPLE 15.9

Precipitation of Calcium Oxalate

Blood will not clot if calcium ions are removed from its plasma. Some blood collection tubes contain salts of the oxalate ion,  for this purpose (Figure 15.5). At sufficiently high concentrations, the calcium and oxalate ions form solid,  (calcium oxalate monohydrate). The concentration of  in a sample of blood serum is  What concentration of  ion must be established before  begins to precipitate?

Solution

The equilibrium expression is:

For this reaction:

(see Appendix J)

Substitute the provided calcium ion concentration into the solubility product expression and solve for oxalate concentration:

A concentration of  is necessary to initiate the precipitation of  under these

conditions.

Check Your Learning

If a solution contains  of  per liter, what concentration of  ion must be reached by adding solid  before  begins to precipitate? Neglect any increase in volume upon adding the solid silver nitrate.

Answer: 

EXAMPLE 15.10

Concentrations Following Precipitation

Clothing washed in water that has a manganese  concentration exceeding  may be stained by the manganese upon oxidation, but the amount of  in the water can be decreased by adding a base to precipitate  . What  is required to keep  equal to 

Solution

The dissolution of  is described by the equation:

At equilibrium:

or

so

Calculate the pH from the pOH:

(final result rounded to one significant digit, limited by the certainty of the  )

Check Your Learning

The first step in the preparation of magnesium metal is the precipitation of  from sea water by the addition of  . The concentration of  in sea water is  Calculate the pH at which  is decreased to 

Answer:

In solutions containing two or more ions that may form insoluble compounds with the same counter ion, an experimental strategy called selective precipitation may be used to remove individual ions from solution. By increasing the counter ion concentration in a controlled manner, ions in solution may be precipitated individually, assuming their compound solubilities are adequately different. In solutions with equal concentrations of target ions, the ion forming the least soluble compound will precipitate first (at the lowest concentration of counter ion), with the other ions subsequently precipitating as their compound’s solubilities are reached. As an illustration of this technique, the next example exercise describes separation of a two halide ions via precipitation of one as a silver salt.

Chemistry in Everyday Life

The Role of Precipitation in Wastewater Treatment

Solubility equilibria are useful tools in the treatment of wastewater carried out in facilities that may treat the municipal water in your city or town (Figure 15.6). Specifically, selective precipitation is used to remove contaminants from wastewater before it is released back into natural bodies of water. For example, phosphate ions  are often present in the water discharged from manufacturing facilities. An abundance of phosphate causes excess algae to grow, which impacts the amount of oxygen available for marine life as well as making water unsuitable for human consumption.

One common way to remove phosphates from water is by the addition of calcium hydroxide, or lime,  . As the water is made more basic, the calcium ions react with phosphate ions to produce hydroxylapatite,  , which then precipitates out of the solution:

Because the amount of calcium ion added does not result in exceeding the solubility products for other calcium salts, the anions of those salts remain behind in the wastewater. The precipitate is then removed by filtration and the water is brought back to a neutral  by the addition of  in a recarbonation process. Other chemicals can also be used for the removal of phosphates by precipitation, including iron(III) chloride and aluminum sulfate.

View this site (http://openstax.org/l/16Wastewater) for more information on how phosphorus is removed from wastewater.

EXAMPLE 15.11

Precipitation of Silver Halides

A solution contains  of KBr and  of KCl per liter.  is gradually added to this solution. Which forms first, solid  or solid 

Solution

The two equilibria involved are:

If the solution contained about equalconcentrations of  and  , then the silver salt with the smaller  (AgBr) would precipitate first. The concentrations are not equal, however, so the  at which AgCl begins to precipitate and the  at which AgBr begins to precipitate must be calculated. The salt that forms at the lower  precipitates first.

AgBr precipitates when  equals  for AgBr

AgBr begins to precipitate when  is  .

For AgCl: AgCl precipitates when  equals  for AgCl  ). When 

AgCl begins to precipitate when  is  .

 begins to precipitate at a lower  than AgBr, so AgCl begins to precipitate first. Note the chloride ion concentration of the initial mixture was significantly greater than the bromide ion concentration, and so silver chloride precipitated first despite having a  greater than that of silver bromide.

Check Your Learning

If silver nitrate solution is added to a solution which is  in both  and  ions, at what  would precipitation begin, and what would be the formula of the precipitate?

Answer:

 AgBr precipitates first

Common Ion Effect

Compared with pure water, the solubility of an ionic compound is less in aqueous solutions containing a com onion(one also produced by dissolution of the ionic compound). This is an example of a phenomenon known as the common ion effect, which is a consequence of the law of mass action that may be explained using Le ChÂtelier’s principle. Consider the dissolution of silver iodide:

This solubility equilibrium may be shifted left by the addition of either silver(I) or iodide ions, resulting in the precipitation of AgI and lowered concentrations of dissolved  and  . In solutions that already contain either of these ions, less AgI may be dissolved than in solutions without these ions.

This effect may also be explained in terms of mass action as represented in the solubility product expression:

The mathematical product of silver(I) and iodide ion molarities is constant in an equilibrium mixture regardles ofthesourceoftheions, and so an increase in one ion’s concentration must be balanced by a proportional decrease in the other.

LINK TO LEARNING

View this simulation (http://openstax.org/l/16solublesalts) to explore various aspects of the common ion effect.

EXAMPLE 15.12

Common Ion Effect on Solubility

What is the effect on the amount of solid  and the concentrations of  and  when each of the following are added to a saturated solution of 

(a)  (b) KOH (c)  (d) 

Solution

The solubility equilibrium is

(a) Adding a common ion,  , will increase the concentration of this ion and shift the solubility equilibrium to the left, decreasing the concentration of hydroxide ion and increasing the amount of undissolved magnesium hydroxide.

(b) Adding a common ion,  , will increase the concentration of this ion and shift the solubility equilibrium to the left, decreasing the concentration of magnesium ion and increasing the amount of undissolved magnesium hydroxide.

(c) The added compound does not contain a common ion, and no effect on the magnesium hydroxide solubility equilibrium is expected.

(d) Adding more solid magnesium hydroxide will increase the amount of undissolved compound in the mixture. The solution is already saturated, though, so the concentrations of dissolved magnesium and hydroxide ions will remain the same.

Thus, changing the amount of solid magnesium hydroxide in the mixture has no effect on the value of  , and no shift is required to restore  to the value of the equilibrium constant.

Check Your Learning

What is the effect on the amount of solid  and the concentrations of  and  when each of the following are added to a saturated solution of 

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

Answer:

(a) mass of  increases,  increases,  decreases; (b) no appreciable effect; (c) no effect except to increase the amount of solid  ; (d) mass of  increases,  decreases,  increases;

EXAMPLE 15.13

Common Ion Effect

Calculate the molar solubility of cadmium sulfide (CdS) in a 0.010-Msolution of cadmium bromide  .   
The  of CdS is  .

Solution

This calculation can be performed using the ICE approach:

Because  is very small, assume  and solve the simplified equation for 

The molar solubility of CdS in this solution is 

Check Your Learning

Calculate the molar solubility of aluminum hydroxide,  , in a 0.015-Msolution of aluminum nitrate,  . The  of  is  .

Answer: