4.5 Quantitative Chemical Analysis

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the fundamental aspects of titrations and gravimetric analysis.   
• Perform stoichiometric calculations using typical titration and gravimetric data.

In the 18th century, the strength (actually the concentration) of vinegar samples was determined by noting the amount of potassium carbonate,  , which had to be added, a little at a time, before bubbling ceased. The greater the weight of potassium carbonate added to reach the point where the bubbling ended, the more concentrated the vinegar.

We now know that the effervescence that occurred during this process was due to reaction with acetic acid,  , the compound primarily responsible for the odor and taste of vinegar. Acetic acid reacts with potassium carbonate according to the following equation:

The bubbling was due to the production of  .

The test of vinegar with potassium carbonate is one type of quantitative analysis—the determination of the amount or concentration of a substance in a sample. In the analysis of vinegar, the concentration of the solute (acetic acid) was determined from the amount of reactant that combined with the solute present in a known volume of the solution. In other types of chemical analyses, the amount of a substance present in a sample is determined by measuring the amount of product that results.

Titration

The described approach to measuring vinegar strength was an early version of the analytical technique known as titration analysis. A typical titration analysis involves the use of a buret (Figure 4.16) to make incremental additions of a solution containing a known concentration of some substance (the titrant) to a sample solution containing the substance whose concentration is to be measured (the analyte). The titrant and analyte undergo a chemical reaction of known stoichiometry, and so measuring the volume of titrant solution required for complete reaction with the analyte (the equivalence point of the titration) allows calculation of the analyte concentration. The equivalence point of a titration may be detected visually if a distinct change in the appearance of the sample solution accompanies the completion of the reaction. The halt of bubble formation in the classic vinegar analysis is one such example, though, more commonly, special dyes called indicators are added to the sample solutions to impart a change in color at or very near the equivalence point of the titration. Equivalence points may also be detected by measuring some solution property that changes in a predictable way during the course of the titration. Regardless of the approach taken to detect a titration’s equivalence point, the volume of titrant actually measured is called the end point. Properly designed titration methods typically ensure that the difference between the equivalence and end points is negligible. Though any type of chemical reaction may serve as the basis for a titration analysis, the three described in this chapter (precipitation, acid-base, and redox) are most common. Additional details regarding titration analysis are provided in the chapter on acid-base equilibria.

Titration Analysis

The end point in a titration of a  sample of aqueous HCl was reached by addition of  of 0.250 M NaOH titrant. The titration reaction is:

What is the molarity of the HCl?

Solution

As for all reaction stoichiometry calculations, the key issue is the relation between the molar amounts of the chemical species of interest as depicted in the balanced chemical equation. The approach outlined in previous modules of this chapter is followed, with additional considerations required, since the amounts of reactants provided and requested are expressed as solution concentrations.

For this exercise, the calculation will follow the following outlined steps:

The molar amount of HCl is calculated to be:

 nol HCl Using the provided volume of HCl solution and the definition of molarity, the HCl concentration is:

Note: For these types of titration calculations, it is convenient to recognize that solution molarity is also equal to the number of milimoles of solute per mililiter of solution:

Using this version of the molarity unit will shorten the calculation by eliminating two conversion factors:

Check Your Learning

A  sample of aqueous oxalic acid,  , was titrated with a 0.09113-Msolution of potassium permanganate,  (see net ionic equation below).

A volume of  was required to reach the end point. What is the oxalic acid molarity?

Gravimetric Analysis

A gravimetric analysis is one in which a sample is subjected to some treatment that causes a change in the physical state of the analyte that permits its separation from the other components of the sample. Mass measurements of the sample, the isolated analyte, or some other component of the analysis system, used along with the known stoichiometry of the compounds involved, permit calculation of the analyte concentration. Gravimetric methods were the first techniques used for quantitative chemical analysis, and they remain important tools in the modern chemistry laboratory.

The required change of state in a gravimetric analysis may be achieved by various physical and chemical processes. For example, the moisture (water) content of a sample is routinely determined by measuring the mass of a sample before and after it is subjected to a controlled heating process that evaporates the water. Also common are gravimetric techniques in which the analyte is subjected to a precipitation reaction of the sort described earlier in this chapter. The precipitate is typically isolated from the reaction mixture by filtration, carefully dried, and then weighed (Figure 4.17). The mass of the precipitate may then be used, along with relevant stoichiometric relationships, to calculate analyte concentration.

EXAMPLE 4.15

Gravimetric Analysis

A 0.4550-g solid mixture containing  is dissolved in water and treated with an excess of  , resulting in the precipitation of  of  .

What is the concentration (mass percent) of  in the mixture?

Solution

The plan for this calculation is similar to others used in stoichiometric calculations, the central step being the connection between the moles of  and  through their stoichiometric factor. Once the mass of  is computed, it may be used along with the mass of the sample mixture to calculate the requested percentage concentration.

The mass of  that would yield the provided precipitate mass is

The concentration of  in the sample mixture is then calculated to be

Check Your Learning

What is the percent of chloride ion in a sample if  of the sample produces 1.0881 g of  when treated with excess  ?

Answer: 

The elemental composition of hydrocarbons and related compounds may be determined via a gravimetric method known as combustion analysis. In a combustion analysis, a weighed sample of the compound is heated to a high temperature under a stream of oxygen gas, resulting in its complete combustion to yield gaseous products of known identities. The complete combustion of hydrocarbons, for example, will yield carbon dioxide and water as the only products. The gaseous combustion products are swept through separate, preweighed collection devices containing compounds that selectively absorb each product (Figure 4.18). The mass increase of each device corresponds to the mass of the absorbed product and may be used in an appropriate stoichiometric calculation to derive the mass of the relevant element.

EXAMPLE 4.16

Combustion Analysis

Polyethylene is a hydrocarbon polymer used to produce food-storage bags and many other flexible plastic items. A combustion analysis of a  sample of polyethylene yields  of  and 0.00161 g of  . What is the empirical formula of polyethylene?

Solution

The primary assumption in this exercise is that all the carbon in the sample combusted is converted to carbon dioxide, and all the hydrogen in the sample is converted to water:

Note that a balanced equation is not necessary for the task at hand. To derive the empirical formula of the compound, only the subscripts  and  are needed.

First, calculate the molar amounts of carbon and hydrogen in the sample, using the provided masses of the carbon dioxide and water, respectively. With these molar amounts, the empirical formula for the compound may be written as described in the previous chapter of this text. An outline of this approach is given in the following flow chart:

The empirical formula for the compound is then derived by identifying the smallest whole-number multiples for these molar amounts. The  -to-C molar ratio is

and the empirical formula for polyethylene is  .

Check Your Learning

A 0.00215-g sample of polystyrene, a polymer composed of carbon and hydrogen, produced 0.00726 g of  and  of  in a combustion analysis. What is the empirical formula for polystyrene?

Key Terms

acid substance that produces  when dissolved in water   
acid-base reaction reaction involving the transfer of a hydrogen ion between reactant species   
actual yield amount of product formed in a reaction   
analyte chemical species of interest   
balanced equation chemical equation with equal numbers of atoms for each element in the reactant and product   
base substance that produces  when dissolved in water   
buret device used for the precise delivery of variable liquid volumes, such as in a titration analysis   
chemical equation symbolic representation of a chemical reaction   
coefficient number placed in front of symbols or formulas in a chemical equation to indicate their relative amount   
combustion analysis gravimetric technique used to determine the elemental composition of a compound via the collection and weighing of its gaseous combustion products   
combustion reaction vigorous redox reaction producing significant amounts of energy in the form of heat and, sometimes, light   
complete ionic equation chemical equation in which all dissolved ionic reactants and products, including spectator ions, are explicitly represented by formulas for their dissociated ions   
end point measured volume of titrant solution that yields the change in sample solution appearance or other property expected for stoichiometric equivalence (see equivalencepoint)   
equivalence point volume of titrant solution required to react completely with the analyte in a titration analysis; provides a stoichiometric amount of titrant for the sample’s analyte according to the titration reaction   
excess reactant reactant present in an amount greater than required by the reaction stoichiometry   
gravimetric analysis quantitative chemical analysis method involving the separation of an analyte from a sample by a physical or chemical process and subsequent mass measurements of the analyte, reaction product, and/or sample   
half-reaction an equation that shows whether each reactant loses or gains electrons in a reaction.   
indicator substance added to the sample in a

titration analysis to permit visual detection of the end point insoluble of relatively low solubility; dissolving only to a slight extent limiting reactant reactant present in an amount lower than required by the reaction stoichiometry, thus limiting the amount of product generated molecular equation chemical equation in which all reactants and products are represented as neutral substances net ionic equation chemical equation in which only those dissolved ionic reactants and products that undergo a chemical or physical change are represented (excludes spectator ions) neutralization reaction reaction between an acid and a base to produce salt and water oxidation process in which an element’s oxidation number is increased by loss of electrons oxidation number (also, oxidation state) the charge each atom of an element would have in a compound if the compound were ionic oxidation-reduction reaction (also, redox reaction) reaction involving a change in oxidation number for one or more reactant elements oxidizing agent (also, oxidant) substance that brings about the oxidation of another substance, and in the process becomes reduced percent yield measure of the efficiency of a reaction, expressed as a percentage of the theoretical yield precipitate insoluble product that forms from reaction of soluble reactants precipitation reaction reaction that produces one or more insoluble products; when reactants are ionic compounds, sometimes called doubledisplacement or metathesis product substance formed by a chemical or physical change; shown on the right side of the arrow in a chemical equation quantitative analysis the determination of the amount or concentration of a substance in a sample reactant substance undergoing a chemical or physical change; shown on the left side of the arrow in a chemical equation reducing agent (also, reductant) substance that brings about the reduction of another substance, and in the process becomes oxidized reduction process in which an element’s oxidation number is decreased by gain of electrons salt ionic compound that can be formed by the

reaction of an acid with a base that contains a cation and an anion other than hydroxide or oxide   
single-displacement reaction (also, replacement) redox reaction involving the oxidation of an elemental substance by an ionic species   
solubility the extent to which a substance may be dissolved in water, or any solvent   
soluble of relatively high solubility; dissolving to a relatively large extent   
spectator ion ion that does not undergo a chemical or physical change during a reaction, but its presence is required to maintain charge neutrality   
stoichiometric factor ratio of coefficients in a balanced chemical equation, used in computations relating amounts of reactants and products   
stoichiometry relationships between the amounts of reactants and products of a chemical reaction   
strong acid acid that reacts completely when dissolved in water to yield hydronium ions   
strong base base that reacts completely when dissolved in water to yield hydroxide ions   
theoretical yield amount of product that may be produced from a given amount of reactant(s) according to the reaction stoichiometry   
titrant solution containing a known concentration of substance that will react with the analyte in a titration analysis   
titration analysis quantitative chemical analysis method that involves measuring the volume of a reactant solution required to completely react with the analyte in a sample   
weak acid acid that reacts only to a slight extent when dissolved in water to yield hydronium ions   
weak base base that reacts only to a slight extent when dissolved in water to yield hydroxide ions

Key Equations

percent yield 

Summary

4.1 Writing and Balancing Chemical Equations

Chemical equations are symbolic representations of chemical and physical changes. Formulas for the substances undergoing the change (reactants) and substances generated by the change (products) are separated by an arrow and preceded by integer coefficients indicating their relative numbers. Balanced equations are those whose coefficients result in equal numbers of atoms for each element in the reactants and products. Chemical reactions in aqueous solution that involve ionic reactants or products may be represented more realistically by complete ionic equations and, more succinctly, by net ionic equations.

4.2 Classifying Chemical Reactions

Chemical reactions are classified according to similar patterns of behavior. A large number of important reactions are included in three categories: precipitation, acid-base, and oxidationreduction (redox). Precipitation reactions involve the formation of one or more insoluble products. Acid-base reactions involve the transfer of hydrogen ions between reactants. Redox reactions involve a change in oxidation number for one or more reactant elements. Writing balanced equations for some redox reactions that occur in aqueous solutions is simplified by using a systematic approach called the half-reaction method.

4.3 Reaction Stoichiometry

A balanced chemical equation may be used to describe a reaction’s stoichiometry (the relationships between amounts of reactants and products). Coefficients from the equation are used to derive stoichiometric factors that subsequently may be used for computations relating reactant and product masses, molar amounts, and other quantitative properties.

4.4 Reaction Yields

When reactions are carried out using less-thanstoichiometric quantities of reactants, the amount of product generated will be determined by the limiting reactant. The amount of product generated by a chemical reaction is its actual yield. This yield is often less than the amount of product predicted by the stoichiometry of the balanced chemical equation representing the reaction (its theoretical yield). The extent to which a reaction generates the theoretical amount of product is expressed as its percent yield.

4.5 Quantitative Chemical Analysis

The stoichiometry of chemical reactions may serve as the basis for quantitative chemical analysis methods. Titrations involve measuring the volume of a titrant solution required to completely react with a sample solution. This volume is then used to calculate the concentration of analyte in the sample using the stoichiometry of the titration reaction. Gravimetric analysis involves separating the analyte from the sample by a physical or chemical process, determining its mass, and then calculating its concentration in the sample based on the stoichiometry of the relevant process. Combustion analysis is a gravimetric method used to determine the elemental composition of a compound by collecting and weighing the gaseous products of its combustion.

Exercises

4.1 Writing and Balancing Chemical Equations

1. What does it mean to say an equation is balanced? Why is it important for an equation to be balanced?

2. Consider molecular, complete ionic, and net ionic equations. (a) What is the difference between these types of equations? (b) In what circumstance would the complete and net ionic equations for a reaction be identical?

3. Balance the following equations: (a)  (b)  . (c)  (d)  (e)  (f) (NH4)2Cr2O7(s)-→ Cr2O3(s)+N2(g)+H2O(g)  (h 

4. Balance the following equations:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g)  ） (h) 

5. Write a balanced molecular equation describing each of the following chemical reactions.

(a) Solid calcium carbonate is heated and decomposes to solid calcium oxide and carbon dioxide gas. (b) Gaseous butane,  , reacts with diatomic oxygen gas to yield gaseous carbon dioxide and water vapor.   
(c) Aqueous solutions of magnesium chloride and sodium hydroxide react to produce solid magnesium hydroxide and aqueous sodium chloride.   
(d) Water vapor reacts with sodium metal to produce solid sodium hydroxide and hydrogen gas. Write a balanced equation describing each of the following chemical reactions.   
(a) Solid potassium chlorate,  , decomposes to form solid potassium chloride and diatomic oxygen gas.   
(b) Solid aluminum metal reacts with solid diatomic iodine to form solid  .   
(c) When solid sodium chloride is added to aqueous sulfuric acid, hydrogen chloride gas and aqueous sodium sulfate are produced.   
(d) Aqueous solutions of phosphoric acid and potassium hydroxide react to produce aqueous potassium dihydrogen phosphate and liquid water.

7. Colorful fireworks often involve the decomposition of barium nitrate and potassium chlorate and the reaction of the metals magnesium, aluminum, and iron with oxygen.

(a) Write the formulas of barium nitrate and potassium chlorate.   
(b) The decomposition of solid potassium chlorate leads to the formation of solid potassium chloride and diatomic oxygen gas. Write an equation for the reaction.   
(c) The decomposition of solid barium nitrate leads to the formation of solid barium oxide, diatomic nitrogen gas, and diatomic oxygen gas. Write an equation for the reaction.   
(d) Write separate equations for the reactions of the solid metals magnesium, aluminum, and iron with diatomic oxygen gas to yield the corresponding metal oxides. (Assume the iron oxide contains  ions.)

8. Fill in the blank with a single chemical formula for a covalent compound that will balance the equation:

9. Aqueous hydrogen fluoride (hydrofluoric acid) is used to etch glass and to analyze minerals for their silicon content. Hydrogen fluoride will also react with sand (silicon dioxide). (a) Write an equation for the reaction of solid silicon dioxide with hydrofluoric acid to yield gaseous silicon tetrafluoride and liquid water. (b) The mineral fluorite (calcium fluoride) occurs extensively in Illinois. Solid calcium fluoride can also be prepared by the reaction of aqueous solutions of calcium chloride and sodium fluoride, yielding aqueous sodium chloride as the other product. Write complete and net ionic equations for this reaction.

10. A novel process for obtaining magnesium from sea water involves several reactions. Write a balanced chemical equation for each step of the process. (a) The first step is the decomposition of solid calcium carbonate from seashells to form solid calcium oxide and gaseous carbon dioxide. (b) The second step is the formation of solid calcium hydroxide as the only product from the reaction of the solid calcium oxide with liquid water. (c) Solid calcium hydroxide is then added to the seawater, reacting with dissolved magnesium chloride to yield solid magnesium hydroxide and aqueous calcium chloride. (d) The solid magnesium hydroxide is added to a hydrochloric acid solution, producing dissolved magnesium chloride and liquid water. (e) Finally, the magnesium chloride is melted and electrolyzed to yield liquid magnesium metal and diatomic chlorine gas.

11. From the balanced molecular equations, write the complete ionic and net ionic equations for the following: (a)  (b)  (c) 

4.2 Classifying Chemical Reactions

12. Use the following equations to answer the next four questions:

i.    
ii.  →AgCl(s)+ Na+(aq)+NO3-(aq) iii.    
iv.  1   
   
(a) Which equation describes a physical change?   
(b) Which equation identifies the reactants and products of a combustion reaction? (c) Which equation is not balanced?   
(d) Which is a net ionic equation?

13. Indicate what type, or types, of reaction each of the following represents: (a)  (b)  (c) 

14. Indicate what type, or types, of reaction each of the following represents: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

15. Silver can be separated from gold because silver dissolves in nitric acid while gold does not. Is the dissolution of silver in nitric acid an acid-base reaction or an oxidation-reduction reaction? Explain your answer.

16. Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the following compounds:

(a) NaI   
(b)    
(c)    
(d)    
(e)    
(f )  , rubidium superoxide   
(g) HF

17. Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the compounds listed. None of the oxygen-containing compounds are peroxides or superoxides. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) 

18. Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the compounds listed. None of the oxygen-containing compounds are peroxides or superoxides. (a)  (b)  (c) BrOH (d)  (e)  (f ) NaH

19. Classify the following as acid-base reactions or oxidation-reduction reactions:

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) 

20. Identify the atoms that are oxidized and reduced, the change in oxidation state for each, and the oxidizing and reducing agents in each of the following equations: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  ） (f ) 

21. Complete and balance the following acid-base equations:

(a) HCl gas reacts with solid  .   
(b) A solution of  is added to a solution of  .

22. Complete and balance the following acid-base equations: (a) A solution of  is added to a solution of LiOH. (b) Aqueous  reacts with NaOH. (c)  reacts with HF gas.

23. Complete and balance the following oxidation-reduction reactions, which give the highest possible oxidation state for the oxidized atoms. (a)  (b)  (single displacement) (c)  (d)  (products are a strong base and a diatomic gas)

24. Complete and balance the following oxidation-reduction reactions, which give the highest possible oxidation state for the oxidized atoms. (a)  (b)  (c) 

25. Complete and balance the equations for the following acid-base neutralization reactions. If water is used as a solvent, write the reactants and products as aqueous ions. In some cases, there may be more than one correct answer, depending on the amounts of reactants used. (a)  (b)  (assume an excess of water and that the product dissolves) (c)  ↓

26. When heated to  , diamonds, which are pure carbon, are oxidized by atmospheric oxygen. (They burn!) Write the balanced equation for this reaction.

27. The military has experimented with lasers that produce very intense light when fluorine combines explosively with hydrogen. What is the balanced equation for this reaction?

28. Write the molecular, total ionic, and net ionic equations for the following reactions: (a)  (b) 

29. Great Lakes Chemical Company produces bromine,  , from bromide salts such as NaBr, in Arkansas brine by treating the brine with chlorine gas. Write a balanced equation for the reaction of NaBr with  .

30. In a common experiment in the general chemistry laboratory, magnesium metal is heated in air to produce MgO. MgO is a white solid, but in these experiments it often looks gray, due to small amounts of  , a compound formed as some of the magnesium reacts with nitrogen. Write a balanced equation for each reaction.

31. Lithium hydroxide may be used to absorb carbon dioxide in enclosed environments, such as manned spacecraft and submarines. Write an equation for the reaction that involves  of LiOH per 1 mol of  . (Hint: Water is one of the products.)

32. Calcium propionate is sometimes added to bread to retard spoilage. This compound can be prepared by the reaction of calcium carbonate,  , with propionic acid,  , which has properties similar to those of acetic acid. Write the balanced equation for the formation of calcium propionate.

33. Complete and balance the equations of the following reactions, each of which could be used to remove hydrogen sulfide from natural gas: (a)  (b) 

34. Copper(II) sulfide is oxidized by molecular oxygen to produce gaseous sulfur trioxide and solid copper(II) oxide. The gaseous product then reacts with liquid water to produce liquid dihydrogen sulfate as the only product. Write the two equations which represent these reactions.

35. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions used to prepare each of the following compounds from the given starting material(s). In some cases, additional reactants may be required. (a) solid ammonium nitrate from gaseous molecular nitrogen via a two-step process (first reduce the nitrogen to ammonia, then neutralize the ammonia with an appropriate acid) (b) gaseous hydrogen bromide from liquid molecular bromine via a one-step redox reaction (c) gaseous  from solid Zn and S via a two-step process (first a redox reaction between the starting materials, then reaction of the product with a strong acid)

36. Calcium cyclamate  is an artificial sweetener used in many countries around the world but is banned in the United States. It can be purified industrially by converting it to the barium salt through reaction of the acid  with barium carbonate, treatment with sulfuric acid (barium sulfate is very insoluble), and then neutralization with calcium hydroxide. Write the balanced equations for these reactions.

37. Complete and balance each of the following half-reactions (steps 2–5 in half-reaction method): (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (in acidic solution) (e)  (in basic solution) (f )  (in acidic solution) (g)  (in acidic solution) (h)  (in basic solution)

38. Complete and balance each of the following half-reactions (steps 2–5 in half-reaction method): (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (in basic solution) (e)  (in acidic solution) (f )  (in acidic solution) (g)  (in basic solution) (h)  (in acidic solution)

39. Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method: (a)  (b)  (in acid) (c)  in acid) (d)  (e)  (in acid)

40. Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method (a)  (in acid) (b)  (in base) (c)  ) (in acid) (d)  (gas phase) (e)  2(g) (in acid) (f )  (in base) (g 

41. Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method: (a)  (in base) (b)  (in base) (c)  (in acid)

4.3 Reaction Stoichiometry

42. Write the balanced equation, then outline the steps necessary to determine the information requested in each of the following:

(a) The number of moles and the mass of chlorine,  , required to react with  of sodium metal, Na, to produce sodium chloride, NaCl.   
(b) The number of moles and the mass of oxygen formed by the decomposition of  of mercury(II) oxide. (c) The number of moles and the mass of sodium nitrate,  , required to produce  of oxygen.  is the other product.)   
(d) The number of moles and the mass of carbon dioxide formed by the combustion of  of carbon in an excess of oxygen.   
(e) The number of moles and the mass of copper(II) carbonate needed to produce  of copper(II) oxide. (  is the other product.)   
(f )

H H 1 1 The number of moles and the mass of Br C C-Br formed by the reaction of 12.85 g of 1 1 H H with an excess of 

43. Determine the number of moles and the mass requested for each reaction in Exercise 4.42.

44. Write the balanced equation, then outline the steps necessary to determine the information requested in each of the following: (a) The number of moles and the mass of Mg required to react with  of HCl and produce  and  . (b) The number of moles and the mass of oxygen formed by the decomposition of  of silver(I) oxide. (c) The number of moles and the mass of magnesium carbonate,  , required to produce  of carbon dioxide.  is the other product.) (d) The number of moles and the mass of water formed by the combustion of  of acetylene,  , in an excess of oxygen. (e) The number of moles and the mass of barium peroxide,  , needed to produce  of barium oxide, BaO  is the other product.) (f )

H H H H The number of moles and the mass of C: :Crequired to react with  to produce 9.55 g of H—C- C- O一H. H H H H

45. Determine the number of moles and the mass requested for each reaction in Exercise 4.44.

46.  is produced by the reaction of  of a 0.8775-M solution of  according to the following equation:  (a) Outline the steps necessary to determine the number of moles and mass of  . (b) Perform the calculations outlined.

47. Gallium chloride is formed by the reaction of  of a 1.44 M solution of HCl according to the following equation:  (a) Outline the steps necessary to determine the number of moles and mass of gallium chloride. (b) Perform the calculations outlined.

48.  is produced by the reaction of  of  according to the following equation:  (a) How many molecules of  are produced? (b) What mass of  is produced?

49. Silver is often extracted from ores such as  and then recovered by the reaction 2K  (a) How many molecules of  are produced by the reaction of  of  (b) What mass of  is produced?

50. What mass of silver oxide,  , is required to produce  of silver sulfadiazine,  , from the reaction of silver oxide and sulfadiazine? 

51. Carborundum is silicon carbide, SiC, a very hard material used as an abrasive on sandpaper and in other applications. It is prepared by the reaction of pure sand,  , with carbon at high temperature. Carbon monoxide, CO, is the other product of this reaction. Write the balanced equation for the reaction, and calculate how much  is required to produce  of SiC.

52. Automotive air bags inflate when a sample of sodium azide,  , is very rapidly decomposed.  What mass of sodium azide is required to produce 2.6 ft  (73.6 L) of nitrogen gas with a density of  L?

53. Urea,  , is manufactured on a large scale for use in producing urea-formaldehyde plastics and as a fertilizer. What is the maximum mass of urea that can be manufactured from the  produced by combustion of  of carbon followed by the reaction? 

54. In an accident, a solution containing  of nitric acid was spilled. Two kilograms of  was quickly spread on the area and  was released by the reaction. Was sufficient  used to neutralize all of the acid?

55. A compact car gets 37.5 miles per gallon on the highway. If gasoline contains  carbon by mass and has a density of  , determine the mass of carbon dioxide produced during a 500-mile trip (3.785 liters per gallon).

56. What volume of  hydrochloric acid solution can be prepared from the HCl produced by the reaction of  of NaCl with excess sulfuric acid? 

57. What volume of a  solution contains enough KI to react exactly with the  in  of a 0.3842  solution of  ? 

58. A mordant is a substance that combines with a dye to produce a stable fixed color in a dyed fabric. Calcium acetate is used as a mordant. It is prepared by the reaction of acetic acid with calcium hydroxide.  What mass of  is required to react with the acetic acid in  of a solution having a density of  and containing  acetic acid by mass?

59. The toxic pigment called white lead,  , has been replaced in white paints by rutile,  . How much rutile (g) can be prepared from  of an ore that contains  ilmenite (FeTiO3) by mass? 

4.4 Reaction Yields

60. The following quantities are placed in a container:  atoms of hydrogen,  of sulfur, and  of diatomic oxygen. (a) What is the total mass in grams for the collection of all three elements? (b) What is the total number of moles of atoms for the three elements? (c) If the mixture of the three elements formed a compound with molecules that contain two hydrogen atoms, one sulfur atom, and four oxygen atoms, which substance is consumed first? (d) How many atoms of each remaining element would remain unreacted in the change described in (c)?   
61. What is the limiting reactant in a reaction that produces sodium chloride from 8 g of sodium and 8 g of diatomic chlorine?   
62. Which of the postulates of Dalton's atomic theory explains why we can calculate a theoretical yield for a chemical reaction?   
63. A student isolated  of a compound following a procedure that would theoretically yield 81 g. What was his percent yield?   
64. A sample of  of carbon dioxide was obtained by heating 1.31 g of calcium carbonate. What is the percent yield for this reaction? 

65. Freon-12,  , is prepared from  by reaction with HF. The other product of this reaction is HCl. Outline the steps needed to determine the percent yield of a reaction that produces  of  from  of  . Freon-12 has been banned and is no longer used as a refrigerant because it catalyzes the decomposition of ozone and has a very long lifetime in the atmosphere. Determine the percent yield.

66. Citric acid,  , a component of jams, jellies, and fruity soft drinks, is prepared industrially via fermentation of sucrose by the mold Aspergilusniger. The equation representing this reaction is  What mass of citric acid is produced from exactly 1 metric ton  of sucrose if the yield is 

67. Toluene,  , is oxidized by air under carefully controlled conditions to benzoic acid,  , which is used to prepare the food preservative sodium benzoate,  . What is the percent yield of a reaction that converts  of toluene to  of benzoic acid? 

68. In a laboratory experiment, the reaction of  of  with  of  produced  o Determine the theoretical yield in grams and the percent yield for this reaction.

69. Outline the steps needed to solve the following problem, then do the calculations. Ether,  , which was originally used as an anesthetic but has been replaced by safer and more effective medications, is prepared by the reaction of ethanol with sulfuric acid.  What is the percent yield of ether if   is isolated from the reaction of 1.500 L of   ?

70. Outline the steps needed to determine the limiting reactant when  of propane,  , is burned with  of oxygen. Determine the limiting reactant.

71. Outline the steps needed to determine the limiting reactant when  of Cr and  of  react according to the following chemical equation.  Determine the limiting reactant.

72. What is the limiting reactant when  of lithium and  of nitrogen combine to form lithium nitride, a component of advanced batteries, according to the following unbalanced equation? 

73. Uranium can be isolated from its ores by dissolving it as  , then separating it as solid  Addition of  of sodium oxalate,  , to a solution containing 1.481 g of uranyl nitrate,  , yields  of solid   Determine the limiting reactant and the percent yield of this reaction.

74. How many molecules of  can be prepared from  molecules and  molecules?

75. How many molecules of the sweetener saccharin can be prepared from 30 C atoms,  atoms, 12 O atoms, 8 S atoms, and  atoms?

76. The phosphorus pentoxide used to produce phosphoric acid for cola soft drinks is prepared by burning phosphorus in oxygen. (a) What is the limiting reactant when  of  and  of  react according to  (b) Calculate the percent yield if  of  is isolated from the reaction.

77. Would you agree to buy 1 trillion (1,000,000,000,000) gold atoms for  5?\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \Pi } } } } } = 3 1 . 1 \mathrm { \underline { { \mathbf { g } } } } ,$ )

4.5 Quantitative Chemical Analysis

78. What volume of 0.0105-M HBr solution is required to titrate  of a 0.0100-MCa(OH)2 solution? 

79. Titration of a  sample of acid rain required  of 0.0811 MNaOH to reach the end point. If we assume that the acidity of the rain is due to the presence of sulfuric acid, what was the concentration of sulfuric acid in this sample of rain?

80. What is the concentration of NaCl in a solution if titration of  of the solution with 0.2503 MAgNO3 requires  of the  solution to reach the end point?

81. In a common medical laboratory determination of the concentration of free chloride ion in blood serum, a serum sample is titrated with a  solution.  What is the  concentration in a  sample of normal serum that requires  of   to reach the end point?

82. Potatoes can be peeled commercially by soaking them in a 3-M to  solution of sodium hydroxide, then removing the loosened skins by spraying them with water. Does a sodium hydroxide solution have a suitable concentration if titration of  of the solution requires  of 1.65 M HCI to reach the end point?

83. A sample of gallium bromide,  , weighing 0.165 g was dissolved in water and treated with silver nitrate,  , resulting in the precipitation of  . Use these data to compute the  (by mass) GaBr3.

84. The principal component of mothballs is naphthalene, a compound with a molecular mass of about 130 amu, containing only carbon and hydrogen. A  sample of naphthalene burns to give  of  . Determine its empirical and molecular formulas.

85. A  sample of a compound composed of boron and hydrogen, with a molecular mass of  amu, burns spontaneously when exposed to air, producing  of  . What are the empirical and molecular formulas of the compound?

86. Sodium bicarbonate (baking soda),  , can be purified by dissolving it in hot water  , filtering to remove insoluble impurities, cooling to  to precipitate solid  , and then filtering to remove the solid, leaving soluble impurities in solution. Any  that remains in solution is not recovered. The solubility of  in hot water of  is  . Its solubility in cold water of  is  . What is the percent yield of  when it is purified by this method?

87. What volume of  is required to react completely with  of sodium hydrogen carbonate? 

88. What volume of  is required to react completely with 0.2352 g of potassium hydrogen phosphate? 

89. What volume of a 0.3300-Msolution of sodium hydroxide would be required to titrate  of 0.1500  oxalic acid? 

90. What volume of a 0.00945-Msolution of potassium hydroxide would be required to titrate  of a sample of acid rain with a  concentration of  

91. A sample of solid calcium hydroxide,  , is allowed to stand in water until a saturated solution is formed. A titration of  of this solution with  requires  of the acid to reach the end point.  What is the molarity?

92. What mass of  will react with  of butanoic to form the preservative calcium butanoate according to the equation?

93. How many milliliters of a 0.1500-Msolution of KOH will be required to titrate  of a 0.0656-M solution of  ? H3PO4(  1

94. Potassium hydrogen phthalate,  , or KHP, is used in many laboratories, including general chemistry laboratories, to standardize solutions of base. KHP is one of only a few stable solid acids that can be dried by warming and weighed. A 0.3420-  sample of  reacts with  of a NaOH solution in a titration. What is the molar concentration of the NaOH? 

95. The reaction of  with Al at  gives black crystals of a compound containing only tungsten and chlorine. A sample of this compound, when reduced with hydrogen, gives  of tungsten metal and hydrogen chloride, which is absorbed in water. Titration of the hydrochloric acid thus produced requires  of 0.1051  NaOH to reach the end point. What is the empirical formula of the black tungsten chloride?