30.6 Plant Sensory Systems and Responses

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Describe how red and blue light affect plant growth and metabolic activities Discuss gravitropism Understand how hormones affect plant growth and development Describe thigmotropism, thigmonastism, and thigmogenesis Explain how plants defend themselves from predators and respond to wounds

Animals can respond to environmental factors by moving to a new location. Plants, however, are rooted in place and must respond to the surrounding environmental factors. Plants have sophisticated systems to detect and respond to light, gravity, temperature, and physical touch. Receptors sense environmental factors and relay the information to effector systems—often through intermediate chemical messengers—to bring about plant responses.

Plant Responses to Light

Plants have a number of sophisticated uses for light that go far beyond their ability to photosynthesize low-molecular-weight sugars using only carbon dioxide, light, and water. Photomorphogenesis is the growth and development of plants in response to light. It allows plants to optimize their use of light and space. Photoperiodism is the ability to use light to track time. Plants can tell the time of day and time of year by sensing and using various wavelengths of sunlight. Phototropism is a directional response that allows plants to grow towards, or even away from, light.

The sensing of light in the environment is important to plants; it can be crucial for competition and survival. The response of plants to light is mediated by different photoreceptors, which are comprised of a protein covalently bonded to a light-absorbing pigment called a chromophore. Together, the two are called a chromoprotein.

The red/far-red and violet-blue regions of the visible light spectrum trigger structural development in plants. Sensory photoreceptors absorb light in these particular regions of the visible light spectrum because of the quality of light available in the daylight spectrum. In terrestrial habitats, light absorption by chlorophylls peaks in the blue and red regions of the spectrum. As light filters through the canopy and the blue and red wavelengths are absorbed, the spectrum shifts to the far-red end, shifting the plant community to those plants better adapted to respond to far-red light. Blue-light receptors allow plants to gauge the direction and abundance of sunlight, which is rich in blue–green emissions. Water absorbs red light, which makes the detection of blue light essential for algae and aquatic plants.

The Phytochrome System and the Red/Far-Red Response

The phytochromes are a family of chromoproteins with a linear tetrapyrrole chromophore, similar to the ringed tetrapyrrole light-absorbing head group of chlorophyll. Phytochromes have two photo-interconvertible forms: Pr and Pfr. Pr absorbs red light  and is immediately converted to Pfr. Pfr absorbs far-red light (\~730 nm) and is quickly converted back to Pr. Absorption of red or far-red light causes a massive change to the shape of the chromophore, altering the conformation and activity of the phytochrome protein to which it is bound. Pfr is the physiologically active form of the protein; therefore, exposure to red light yields physiological activity. Exposure to far-red light inhibits phytochrome activity. Together, the two forms represent the phytochrome system (Figure 30.38).

The phytochrome system acts as a biological light switch. It monitors the level, intensity, duration, and color of environmental light. The effect of red light is reversible by immediately shining far-red light on the sample, which converts the chromoprotein to the inactive Pr form. Additionally, Pfr can slowly revert to Pr in the dark, or break down over time. In all instances, the physiological response induced by red light is reversed. The active form of phytochrome (Pfr) can directly activate other molecules in the cytoplasm, or it can be trafficked to the nucleus, where it directly activates or represses specific gene expression.

Once the phytochrome system evolved, plants adapted it to serve a variety of needs. Unfiltered, full sunlight contains much more red light than far-red light. Because chlorophyll absorbs strongly in the red region of the visible spectrum, but not in the far-red region, any plant in the shade of another plant on the forest floor will be exposed to red-depleted, far-red-enriched light. The preponderance of far-red light converts phytochrome in the shaded leaves to the Pr (inactive) form, slowing growth. The nearest non-shaded (or even less-shaded) areas on the forest floor have more red light; leaves exposed to these areas sense the red light, which activates the Pfr form and induces growth. In short, plant shoots use the phytochrome system to grow away from shade and towards light. Because competition for light is so fierce in a dense plant community, the evolutionary advantages of the phytochrome system are obvious.

In seeds, the phytochrome system is not used to determine direction and quality of light (shaded versus unshaded). Instead, is it used merely to determine if there is any light at all. This is especially important in species with very small seeds, such as lettuce. Because of their size, lettuce seeds have few food reserves. Their seedlings cannot grow for long before they run out of fuel. If they germinated even a centimeter under the soil surface, the seedling would never make it into the sunlight and would die. In the dark, phytochrome is in the Pr (inactive form) and the seed will not germinate; it will only germinate if exposed to light at the surface of the soil. Upon exposure to light,  is converted to Pfr and germination proceeds.

Plants also use the phytochrome system to sense the change of season. Photoperiodism is a biological response to the timing and duration of day and night. It controls flowering, setting of winter buds, and vegetative growth. Detection of seasonal changes is crucial to plant survival. Although temperature and light intensity influence plant growth, they are not reliable indicators of season because they may vary from one year to the next. Day length is a better indicator of the time of year.

As stated above, unfiltered sunlight is rich in red light but deficient in far-red light. Therefore, at dawn, all the phytochrome molecules in a leaf quickly convert to the active Pfr form, and remain in that form until sunset. In the dark, the Pfr form takes hours to slowly revert back to the Pr form. If the night is long (as in winter), all of the Pfr form reverts. If the night is short (as in summer), a considerable amount of Pfr may remain at sunrise. By sensing the  /Pfr ratio at dawn, a plant can determine the length of the day/night cycle. In addition, leaves retain that information for several days, allowing a comparison between the length of the previous night and the preceding several nights. Shorter nights indicate springtime to the plant; when the nights become longer, autumn is approaching. This information, along with sensing temperature and water availability, allows plants to determine the time of the year and adjust their physiology accordingly. Short-day (long-night) plants use this information to flower in the late summer and early fall, when nights exceed a critical length (often eight or fewer hours). Long-day (short-night) plants flower during the spring, when darkness is less than a critical length (often eight to 15 hours). Not all plants use the phytochrome system in this way. Flowering in day-neutral plants is not regulated by daylength.

CAREER CONNECTION

Horticulturalist

The word “horticulturist” comes from the Latin words for garden (hortus) and culture (cultura). This career has been revolutionized by progress made in the understanding of plant responses to environmental stimuli. Growers of crops, fruit, vegetables, and flowers were previously constrained by having to time their sowing and harvesting according to the season. Now, horticulturists can manipulate plants to increase leaf, flower, or fruit production by understanding how environmental factors affect plant growth and development.

Greenhouse management is an essential component of a horticulturist’s education. To lengthen the night, plants are covered with a blackout shade cloth. Long-day plants are irradiated with red light in winter to promote early flowering. For example, fluorescent (cool white) light high in blue wavelengths encourages leafy growth and is excellent for starting seedlings. Incandescent lamps (standard light bulbs) are rich in red light, and promote flowering in some plants. The timing of fruit ripening can be increased or delayed by applying plant hormones. Recently, considerable progress has been made in the development of plant breeds that are suited to different climates and resistant to pests and transportation damage. Both crop yield and quality have increased as a result of practical applications of the knowledge of plant responses to external stimuli and hormones.

Horticulturists find employment in private and governmental laboratories, greenhouses, botanical gardens, and in the production or research fields. They improve crops by applying their knowledge of genetics and plant physiology. To prepare for a horticulture career, students take classes in botany, plant physiology, plant pathology, landscape design, and plant breeding. To complement these traditional courses, horticulture majors add studies in economics, business, computer science, and communications.

The Blue Light Responses

Phototropism—the directional bending of a plant toward or away from a light source—is a response to blue wavelengths of light. Positive phototropism is growth towards a light source (Figure 30.39), while negative phototropism (also called skototropism) is growth away from light.

The aptly-named phototropins are protein-based receptors responsible for mediating the phototropic response. Like all plant photoreceptors, phototropins consist of a protein portion and a light-absorbing portion, called the chromophore. In phototropins, the chromophore is a covalently-bound molecule of flavin; hence, phototropins belong to a class of proteins called flavoproteins.

Other responses under the control of phototropins are leaf opening and closing, chloroplast movement, and the opening of stomata. However, of all responses controlled by phototropins, phototropism has been studied the longest and is the best understood.

In their 1880 treatise ThePowerofMovementsinPlants, Charles Darwin and his son Francis first described phototropism as the bending of seedlings toward light. Darwin observed that light was perceived by the tip of the plant (the apical meristem), but that the response (bending) took place in a different part of the plant. They concluded that the signal had to travel from the apical meristem to the base of the plant.

In 1913, Peter Boysen-Jensen demonstrated that a chemical signal produced in the plant tip was responsible for the bending at the base. He cut off the tip of a seedling, covered the cut section with a layer of gelatin, and then replaced the tip. The seedling bent toward the light when illuminated. However, when impermeable mica flakes were inserted between the tip and the cut base, the seedling did not bend. A refinement of the experiment showed that the signal traveled on the shaded side of the seedling. When the mica plate was inserted on the illuminated side, the plant did bend towards the light. Therefore, the chemical signal was a growth stimulant because the phototropic response involved faster cell elongation on the shaded side than on the illuminated side. We now know that as light passes through a plant stem, it is diffracted and generates phototropin activation across the stem. Most activation occurs on the lit side, causing the plant hormone indole acetic acid (IAA) to accumulate on the shaded side. Stem cells elongate under influence of IAA.

Cryptochromes are another class of blue-light absorbing photoreceptors that also contain a flavin-based chromophore. Cryptochromes set the plants' 24-hour activity cycle, also know as its circadian rhythem, using blue light cues. There is some evidence that cryptochromes work together with phototropins to mediate the phototropic response.

LINK TO LEARNING

Use the navigation menu in the left panel of this website (http://openstax.org/l/plnts_n_motion) to view images of plants in

motion.

Plant Responses to Gravity

Whether or not they germinate in the light or in total darkness, shoots usually sprout up from the ground, and roots grow downward into the ground. A plant laid on its side in the dark will send shoots upward when given enough time. Gravitropism ensures that roots grow into the soil and that shoots grow toward sunlight. Growth of the shoot apical tip upward is called negative gravitropism, whereas growth of the roots downward is called positive gravitropism.

Amyloplasts (also known as statoliths) are specialized plastids that contain starch granules and settle downward in response to gravity. Amyloplasts are found in shoots and in specialized cells of the root cap. When a plant is tilted, the statoliths drop to the new bottom cell wall. A few hours later, the shoot or root will show growth in the new vertical direction.

The mechanism that mediates gravitropism is reasonably well understood. When amyloplasts settle to the bottom of the gravitysensing cells in the root or shoot, they physically contact the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), causing the release of calcium ions from inside the ER. This calcium signaling in the cells causes polar transport of the plant hormone IAA to the bottom of the cell. In roots, a high concentration of IAA inhibits cell elongation. The effect slows growth on the lower side of the root, while cells develop normally on the upper side. IAA has the opposite effect in shoots, where a higher concentration at the lower side of the shoot stimulates cell expansion, causing the shoot to grow up. After the shoot or root begin to grow vertically, the amyloplasts return to their normal position. Other hypotheses—involving the entire cell in the gravitropism effect—have been proposed to explain why some mutants that lack amyloplasts may still exhibit a weak gravitropic response.

Growth Responses

A plant’s sensory response to external stimuli relies on chemical messengers (hormones). Plant hormones affect all aspects of plant life, from flowering to fruit setting and maturation, and from phototropism to leaf fall. Potentially every cell in a plant can produce plant hormones. They can act in their cell of origin or be transported to other portions of the plant body, with many plant responses involving the synergistic or antagonistic interaction of two or more hormones. In contrast, animal hormones are produced in specific glands and transported to a distant site for action, and they act alone.

Plant hormones are a group of unrelated chemical substances that affect plant morphogenesis. Five major plant hormones are traditionally described: auxins (particularly IAA), cytokinins, gibberellins, ethylene, and abscisic acid. In addition, other nutrients and environmental conditions can be characterized as growth factors.

Auxins

The term auxin is derived from the Greek word auxein, which means "to grow." Auxins are the main hormones responsible for cell elongation in phototropism and gravitropism. They also control the differentiation of meristem into vascular tissue, and promote leaf development and arrangement. While many synthetic auxins are used as herbicides, IAA is the only naturally occurring auxin that shows physiological activity. Apical dominance—the inhibition of lateral bud formation—is triggered by auxins produced in the apical meristem. Flowering, fruit setting and ripening, and inhibition of abscission (leaf falling) are other plant responses under the direct or indirect control of auxins. Auxins also act as a relay for the effects of the blue light and red/far-red responses.

Commercial use of auxins is widespread in plant nurseries and for crop production. IAA is used as a rooting hormone to promote growth of adventitious roots on cuttings and detached leaves. Applying synthetic auxins to tomato plants in greenhouses promotes normal fruit development. Outdoor application of auxin promotes synchronization of fruit setting and dropping to coordinate the harvesting season. Fruits such as seedless cucumbers can be induced to set fruit by treating unfertilized plant flowers with auxins.

Cytokinins

The effect of cytokinins was first reported when it was found that adding the liquid endosperm of coconuts to developing plant embryos in culture stimulated their growth. The stimulating growth factor was found to be cytokinin, a hormone that promotes cytokinesis (cell division). Almost 200 naturally occurring or synthetic cytokinins are known to date. Cytokinins are most abundant in growing tissues, such as roots, embryos, and fruits, where cell division is occurring. Cytokinins are known to delay senescence in leaf tissues, promote mitosis, and stimulate differentiation of the meristem in shoots and roots. Many effects on plant development are under the influence of cytokinins, either in conjunction with auxin or another hormone. For example, apical dominance seems to result from a balance between auxins that inhibit lateral buds, and cytokinins that promote bushier

growth.

Gibberellins

Gibberellins (GAs) are a group of about 125 closely related plant hormones that stimulate shoot elongation, seed germination, and fruit and flower maturation. GAs are synthesized in the root and stem apical meristems, young leaves, and seed embryos. In urban areas, GA antagonists are sometimes applied to trees under power lines to control growth and reduce the frequency of pruning.

GAs break dormancy (a state of inhibited growth and development) in the seeds of plants that require exposure to cold or light to germinate. Abscisic acid is a strong antagonist of GA action. Other effects of GAs include gender expression, seedless fruit development, and the delay of senescence in leaves and fruit. Seedless grapes are obtained through standard breeding methods and contain inconspicuous seeds that fail to develop. Because GAs are produced by the seeds, and because fruit development and stem elongation are under GA control, these varieties of grapes would normally produce small fruit in compact clusters. Maturing grapes are routinely treated with GA to promote larger fruit size, as well as looser bunches (longer stems), which reduces the instance of mildew infection (Figure 30.40).

Abscisic Acid

The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) was first discovered as the agent that causes the abscission or dropping of cotton bolls. However, more recent studies indicate that ABA plays only a minor role in the abscission process. ABA accumulates as a response to stressful environmental conditions, such as dehydration, cold temperatures, or shortened day lengths. Its activity counters many of the growth-promoting effects of GAs and auxins. ABA inhibits stem elongation and induces dormancy in lateral buds.

ABA induces dormancy in seeds by blocking germination and promoting the synthesis of storage proteins. Plants adapted to temperate climates require a long period of cold temperature before seeds germinate. This mechanism protects young plants from sprouting too early during unseasonably warm weather in winter. As the hormone gradually breaks down over winter, the seed is released from dormancy and germinates when conditions are favorable in spring. Another effect of ABA is to promote the development of winter buds; it mediates the conversion of the apical meristem into a dormant bud. Low soil moisture causes an increase in ABA, which causes stomata to close, reducing water loss in winter buds.

Ethylene

Ethylene is associated with fruit ripening, flower wilting, and leaf fall. Ethylene is unusual because it is a volatile gas  . Hundreds of years ago, when gas street lamps were installed in city streets, trees that grew close to lamp posts developed twisted, thickened trunks and shed their leaves earlier than expected. These effects were caused by ethylene volatilizing from the lamps.

Aging tissues (especially senescing leaves) and nodes of stems produce ethylene. The best-known effect of the hormone, however, is the promotion of fruit ripening. Ethylene stimulates the conversion of starch and acids to sugars. Some people store unripe fruit, such as avocadoes, in a sealed paper bag to accelerate ripening; the gas released by the first fruit to mature will speed up the maturation of the remaining fruit. Ethylene also triggers leaf and fruit abscission, flower fading and dropping, and promotes germination in some cereals and sprouting of bulbs and potatoes.

Ethylene is widely used in agriculture. Commercial fruit growers control the timing of fruit ripening with application of the gas.   
Horticulturalists inhibit leaf dropping in ornamental plants by removing ethylene from greenhouses using fans and ventilation.

Nontraditional Hormones

Recent research has discovered a number of compounds that also influence plant development. Their roles are less understood than the effects of the major hormones described so far.

Jasmonates play a major role in defense responses to herbivory. Their levels increase when a plant is wounded by a predator, resulting in an increase in toxic secondary metabolites. They contribute to the production of volatile compounds that attract natural enemies of predators. For example, chewing of tomato plants by caterpillars leads to an increase in jasmonic acid levels, which in turn triggers the release of volatile compounds that attract predators of the pest.

Oligosaccharins also play a role in plant defense against bacterial and fungal infections. They act locally at the site of injury, and can also be transported to other tissues. Strigolactones promote seed germination in some species and inhibit lateral apical development in the absence of auxins. Strigolactones also play a role in the establishment of mycorrhizae, a mutualistic association of plant roots and fungi. Brassinosteroids are important to many developmental and physiological processes. Signals between these compounds and other hormones, notably auxin and GAs, amplifies their physiological effect. Apical dominance, seed germination, gravitropism, and resistance to freezing are all positively influenced by hormones. Root growth and fruit dropping are inhibited by steroids.

Plant Responses to Wind and Touch

The shoot of a pea plant winds around a trellis, while a tree grows on an angle in response to strong prevailing winds. These are examples of how plants respond to touch or wind.

The movement of a plant subjected to constant directional pressure is called thigmotropism, from the Greek words thigma meaning “touch,” and tropismimplying “direction.” Tendrils are one example of this. The meristematic region of tendrils is very touch sensitive; light touch will evoke a quick coiling response. Cells in contact with a support surface contract, whereas cells on the opposite side of the support expand (Figure 30.14). Application of jasmonic acid is sufficient to trigger tendril coiling without a mechanical stimulus.

A thigmonastic response is a touch response independent of the direction of stimulus Figure 30.24. In the Venus flytrap, two modified leaves are joined at a hinge and lined with thin fork-like tines along the outer edges. Tiny hairs are located inside the trap. When an insect brushes against these trigger hairs, touching two or more of them in succession, the leaves close quickly, trapping the prey. Glands on the leaf surface secrete enzymes that slowly digest the insect. The released nutrients are absorbed by the leaves, which reopen for the next meal.

Thigmomorphogenesis is a slow developmental change in the shape of a plant subjected to continuous mechanical stress. When trees bend in the wind, for example, growth is usually stunted and the trunk thickens. Strengthening tissue, especially xylem, is produced to add stiffness to resist the wind’s force. Researchers hypothesize that mechanical strain induces growth and differentiation to strengthen the tissues. Ethylene and jasmonate are likely involved in thigmomorphogenesis.

LINK TO LEARNING

Use the menu at the left to navigate to three short movies: (http://openstax.org/l/nastic_mvmt) a Venus fly trap capturing prey, the progressive closing of sensitive plant leaflets, and the twining of tendrils.

Defense Responses against Herbivores and Pathogens

Plants face two types of enemies: herbivores and pathogens. Herbivores both large and small use plants as food, and actively chew them. Pathogens are agents of disease. These infectious microorganisms, such as fungi, bacteria, and nematodes, live off of the plant and damage its tissues. Plants have developed a variety of strategies to discourage or kill attackers.

The first line of defense in plants is an intact and impenetrable barrier. Bark and the waxy cuticle can protect against predators. Other adaptations against herbivory include thorns, which are modified branches, and spines, which are modified leaves. They discourage animals by causing physical damage and inducing rashes and allergic reactions. A plant’s exterior protection can be compromised by mechanical damage, which may provide an entry point for pathogens. If the first line of defense is breached, the plant must resort to a different set of defense mechanisms, such as toxins and enzymes.

Secondary metabolites are compounds that are not directly derived from photosynthesis and are not necessary for respiration or plant growth and development. Many metabolites are toxic, and can even be lethal to animals that ingest them. Some metabolites are alkaloids, which discourage predators with noxious odors (such as the volatile oils of mint and sage) or repellent tastes (like the bitterness of quinine). Other alkaloids affect herbivores by causing either excessive stimulation (caffeine is one example) or the lethargy associated with opioids. Some compounds become toxic after ingestion. For instance, glycol cyanide in the cassava root releases cyanide only upon ingestion; the nearly 500 million humans who rely on cassava for nutrition must be certain to process the root properly before eating.

Mechanical wounding and predator attacks activate defense and protection mechanisms both in the damaged tissue and at sites farther from the injury location. Some defense reactions occur within minutes: others over several hours. The infected and surrounding cells may die, thereby stopping the spread of infection.

Long-distance signaling elicits a systemic response aimed at deterring the predator. As tissue is damaged, jasmonates may promote the synthesis of compounds that are toxic to predators. Jasmonates also elicit the synthesis of volatile compounds that attract parasitoids, which are insects that spend their developing stages in or on another insect, and eventually kill their host. The plant may activate abscission of injured tissue if it is damaged beyond repair.

KEY TERMS

abscisic acid (ABA) plant hormone that induces dormancy in seeds and other organs   
abscission physiological process that leads to the fall of a plant organ (such as leaf or petal drop)   
adventitious root aboveground root that arises from a plant part other than the radicle of the plant embryo   
apical bud bud formed at the tip of the shoot   
apical meristem meristematic tissue located at the tips of stems and roots; enables a plant to extend in length   
auxin plant hormone that influences cell elongation (in phototropism), gravitropism, apical dominance, and root growth   
axillary bud bud located in the axil: the stem area where the petiole connects to the stem   
bark tough, waterproof, outer epidermal layer of cork cells   
bulb modified underground stem that consists of a large bud surrounded by numerous leaf scales   
Casparian strip waxy coating that forces water to cross endodermal plasma membranes before entering the vascular cylinder, instead of moving between endodermal cells   
chromophore molecule that absorbs light   
collenchyma cell elongated plant cell with unevenly thickened walls; provides structural support to the stem and leaves   
companion cell phloem cell that is connected to sieve-tube cells; has large amounts of ribosomes and mitochondria   
compound leaf leaf in which the leaf blade is subdivided to form leaflets, all attached to the midrib   
corm rounded, fleshy underground stem that contains stored food   
cortex ground tissue found between the vascular tissue and the epidermis in a stem or root   
cryptochrome protein that absorbs light in the blue and ultraviolet regions of the light spectrum   
cuticle waxy protective layer on the leaf surface   
cuticle waxy covering on the outside of the leaf and stem that prevents the loss of water   
cytokinin plant hormone that promotes cell division   
dermal tissue protective plant tissue covering the outermost part of the plant; controls gas exchange   
endodermis layer of cells in the root that forms a selective barrier between the ground tissue and the vascular tissue, allowing water and minerals to enter the root while excluding toxins and pathogens   
epidermis single layer of cells found in plant dermal tissue; covers and protects underlying tissue   
ethylene volatile plant hormone that is associated with fruit ripening, flower wilting, and leaf fall   
fibrous root system type of root system in which the roots arise from the base of the stem in a cluster, forming a dense network of roots; found in monocots   
gibberellin (GA) plant hormone that stimulates shoot elongation, seed germination, and the maturation and dropping of fruit and flowers   
ground tissue plant tissue involved in photosynthesis; provides support, and stores water and sugars   
guard cells paired cells on either side of a stoma that control stomatal opening and thereby regulate the movement of gases and water vapor   
intercalary meristem meristematic tissue located at nodes and the bases of leaf blades; found only in monocots   
internode region between nodes on the stem   
jasmonates small family of compounds derived from the fatty acid linoleic acid   
lamina leaf blade   
lateral meristem meristematic tissue that enables a plant to increase in thickness or girth   
lenticel opening on the surface of mature woody stems that facilitates gas exchange   
megapascal (MPa) pressure units that measure water potential   
meristem plant region of continuous growth   
meristematic tissue tissue containing cells that constantly divide; contributes to plant growth   
negative gravitropism growth away from Earth’s gravity   
node point along the stem at which leaves, flowers, or aerial roots originate   
oligosaccharin hormone important in plant defenses against bacterial and fungal infections   
palmately compound leaf leaf type with leaflets that emerge from a point, resembling the palm of a hand   
parenchyma cell most common type of plant cell; found in the stem, root, leaf, and in fruit pulp; site of photosynthesis and starch storage   
pericycle outer boundary of the stele from which lateral roots can arise   
periderm outermost covering of woody stems; consists of the cork cambium, cork cells, and the phelloderm   
permanent tissue plant tissue composed of cells that are no longer actively dividing   
petiole stalk of the leaf   
photomorphogenesis growth and development of plants in response to light   
photoperiodism occurrence of plant processes, such as germination and flowering, according to the time of year   
phototropin blue-light receptor that promotes phototropism, stomatal opening and closing, and other responses that promote photosynthesis   
phototropism directional bending of a plant toward a light source   
phyllotaxy arrangement of leaves on a stem   
phytochrome plant pigment protein that exists in two reversible forms (Pr and Pfr) and mediates morphologic changes in response to red light   
pinnately compound leaf leaf type with a divided leaf blade consisting of leaflets arranged on both sides of the midrib   
pith ground tissue found towards the interior of the vascular tissue in a stem or root   
positive gravitropism growth toward Earth’s gravitational center   
primary growth growth resulting in an increase in length of the stem and the root; caused by cell division in the shoot or root apical meristem   
rhizome modified underground stem that grows horizontally to the soil surface and has nodes and internodes   
root cap protective cells covering the tip of the growing root   
root hair hair-like structure that is an extension of epidermal cells; increases the root surface area and aids in absorption of water and minerals   
root system belowground portion of the plant that supports the plant and absorbs water and minerals   
runner stolon that runs above the ground and produces new clone plants at nodes   
sclerenchyma cell plant cell that has thick secondary walls and provides structural support; usually dead at maturity   
secondary growth growth resulting in an increase in thickness or girth; caused by the lateral meristem and cork cambium   
sessile leaf without a petiole that is attached directly to the plant stem   
shoot system aboveground portion of the plant; consists of nonreproductive plant parts, such as leaves and stems, and reproductive parts, such as flowers and fruits   
sieve-tube cell phloem cell arranged end to end to form a sieve tube that transports organic substances such as sugars and amino acids   
simple leaf leaf type in which the lamina is completely undivided or merely lobed   
sink growing parts of a plant, such as roots and young leaves, which require photosynthate   
source organ that produces photosynthate for a plant   
statolith (also, amyloplast) plant organelle that contains heavy starch granules   
stele inner portion of the root containing the vascular tissue; surrounded by the endodermis   
stipule small green structure found on either side of the leaf stalk or petiole   
stolon modified stem that runs parallel to the ground and can give rise to new plants at the nodes   
strigolactone hormone that promotes seed germination in some species and inhibits lateral apical development in the absence of auxins   
tap root system type of root system with a main root that grows vertically with few lateral roots; found in dicots   
tendril modified stem consisting of slender, twining strands used for support or climbing   
thigmomorphogenesis developmental response to touch   
thigmonastic directional growth of a plant independent of the direction in which contact is applied   
thigmotropism directional growth of a plant in response to constant contact   
thorn modified stem branch appearing as a sharp outgrowth that protects the plant   
tracheid xylem cell with thick secondary walls that helps transport water   
translocation mass transport of photosynthates from source to sink in vascular plants   
transpiration loss of water vapor to the atmosphere through stomata   
trichome hair-like structure on the epidermal surface   
tuber modified underground stem adapted for starch storage; has many adventitious buds   
vascular bundle strands of stem tissue made up of xylem and phloem   
vascular stele strands of root tissue made up of xylem and phloem   
vascular tissue tissue made up of xylem and phloem that transports food and water throughout the plant   
venation pattern of veins in a leaf; may be parallel (as in monocots), reticulate (as in dicots), or dichotomous (as in Gingkobiloba)   
vessel element xylem cell that is shorter than a tracheid and has thinner walls   
water potential  the potential energy of a water solution per unit volume in relation to pure water at atmospheric pressure and ambient temperature   
whorled pattern of leaf arrangement in which three or more leaves are connected at a node

CHAPTER SUMMARY 30.1 The Plant Body

A vascular plant consists of two organ systems: the shoot system and the root system. The shoot system includes the aboveground vegetative portions (stems and leaves) and reproductive parts (flowers and fruits). The root system supports the plant and is usually underground. A plant is composed of two main types of tissue: meristematic tissue and permanent tissue. Meristematic tissue consists of actively dividing cells found in root and shoot tips. As growth occurs, meristematic tissue differentiates into permanent tissue, which is categorized as either simple or complex. Simple tissues are made up of similar cell types; examples include dermal tissue and ground tissue. Dermal tissue

provides the outer covering of the plant. Ground tissue is responsible for photosynthesis; it also supports vascular tissue and may store water and sugars. Complex tissues are made up of different cell types. Vascular tissue, for example, is made up of xylem and phloem cells.

30.2 Stems

The stem of a plant bears the leaves, flowers, and fruits. Stems are characterized by the presence of nodes (the points of attachment for leaves or branches) and internodes (regions between nodes).

Plant organs are made up of simple and complex tissues. The stem has three tissue systems: dermal, vascular, and ground tissue. Dermal tissue is the outer covering of the plant. It contains epidermal cells, stomata, guard cells, and trichomes. Vascular tissue is made up of xylem and phloem tissues and conducts water, minerals, and photosynthetic products. Ground tissue is responsible for photosynthesis and support and is composed of parenchyma, collenchyma, and sclerenchyma cells.

Primary growth occurs at the tips of roots and shoots, causing an increase in length. Woody plants may also exhibit secondary growth, or increase in thickness. In woody plants, especially trees, annual rings may form as growth slows at the end of each season. Some plant species have modified stems that help to store food, propagate new plants, or discourage predators. Rhizomes, corms, stolons, runners, tubers, bulbs, tendrils, and thorns are examples of modified stems.

30.3 Roots

Roots help to anchor a plant, absorb water and minerals, and serve as storage sites for food. Taproots and fibrous roots are the two main types of root systems. In a taproot system, a main root grows vertically downward with a few lateral roots. Fibrous root systems arise at the base of the stem, where a cluster of roots forms a dense network that is shallower than a taproot. The growing root tip is protected by a root cap. The root tip has three main zones: a zone of cell division (cells are actively dividing), a zone of elongation (cells increase in length), and a zone of maturation (cells differentiate to form different kinds of cells). Root vascular tissue conducts water, minerals, and sugars. In some habitats, the roots of certain plants may be modified to form aerial roots or epiphytic roots.

30.4 Leaves

Leaves are the main site of photosynthesis. A typical leaf consists of a lamina (the broad part of the leaf, also called the blade) and a petiole (the stalk that attaches the leaf to a stem). The arrangement of leaves on a stem, known as phyllotaxy, enables maximum exposure to sunlight. Each

plant species has a characteristic leaf arrangement and form. The pattern of leaf arrangement may be alternate, opposite, or spiral, while leaf form may be simple or compound. Leaf tissue consists of the epidermis, which forms the outermost cell layer, and mesophyll and vascular tissue, which make up the inner portion of the leaf. In some plant species, leaf form is modified to form structures such as tendrils, spines, bud scales, and needles.

30.5 Transport of Water and Solutes in Plants

Water potential  is a measure of the difference in potential energy between a water sample and pure water. The water potential in plant solutions is influenced by solute concentration, pressure, gravity, and matric potential. Water potential and transpiration influence how water is transported through the xylem in plants. These processes are regulated by stomatal opening and closing. Photosynthates (mainly sucrose) move from sources to sinks through the plant’s phloem. Sucrose is actively loaded into the sieve-tube elements of the phloem. The increased solute concentration causes water to move by osmosis from the xylem into the phloem. The positive pressure that is produced pushes water and solutes down the pressure gradient. The sucrose is unloaded into the sink, and the water returns to the xylem vessels.

30.6 Plant Sensory Systems and Responses

Plants respond to light by changes in morphology and activity. Irradiation by red light converts the photoreceptor phytochrome to its far-red light-absorbing form—Pfr. This form controls germination and flowering in response to length of day, as well as triggers photosynthesis in dormant plants or those that just emerged from the soil. Blue-light receptors, cryptochromes, and phototropins are responsible for phototropism. Amyloplasts, which contain heavy starch granules, sense gravity. Shoots exhibit negative gravitropism, whereas roots exhibit positive gravitropism. Plant hormones—naturally occurring compounds synthesized in small amounts—can act both in the cells that produce them and in distant tissues and organs. Auxins are responsible for apical dominance, root growth, directional growth toward light, and many other growth responses. Cytokinins stimulate cell division and counter apical dominance in shoots. Gibberellins inhibit dormancy of seeds and promote stem growth. Abscisic acid induces dormancy in seeds and buds, and protects plants from excessive water loss by promoting stomatal closure. Ethylene gas speeds up fruit ripening and dropping of leaves. Plants respond to touch by rapid movements (thigmotropy and thigmonasty) and slow differential growth (thigmomorphogenesis). Plants have evolved defense mechanisms against predators and

pathogens. Physical barriers like bark and spines protect tender tissues. Plants also have chemical defenses, including toxic secondary metabolites and hormones, which elicit additional defense mechanisms.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 30.7 Which layers of the stem are made of parenchyma cells?

A. cortex and pith B. phloem C. sclerenchyma D. xylem

2. Figure 30.32 Positive water potential is placed on the left side of the tube by increasing  such that the water level rises on the right side. Could you equalize the water level on each side of the tube by adding solute, and if so, how?

3. Figure 30.34 Which of the following statements is false?

a. Negative water potential draws water into the root hairs. Cohesion and adhesion draw water up the xylem. Transpiration draws water from the leaf.   
b. Negative water potential draws water into the root hairs. Cohesion and adhesion draw water up the phloem. Transpiration draws water from the leaf.   
c. Water potential decreases from the roots to the top of the plant.   
d. Water enters the plants through root hairs and exits through stoma.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. Plant regions of continuous growth are made up of

a. dermal tissue b. vascular tissue c. meristematic tissue d. permanent tissue

5. Which of the following is the major site of photosynthesis?

a. apical meristem b. ground tissue c. xylem cells d. phloem cells

6. Stem regions at which leaves are attached are called

a. trichomesb. lenticelsc. nodesd. internodes

7. Which of the following cell types forms most of the inside of a plant?

a. meristem cells b. collenchyma cells c. sclerenchyma cells d. parenchyma cells

8. Tracheids, vessel elements, sieve-tube cells, and companion cells are components of

a. vascular tissue b. meristematic tissue c. ground tissue d. dermal tissue

9. The primary growth of a plant is due to the action of the

a. lateral meristem b. vascular cambium c. apical meristem d. cork cambium

10. Which of the following is an example of secondary growth?

a. increase in length b. increase in thickness or girth c. increase in root hairs d. increase in leaf number

11. Secondary growth in stems is usually seen in

a. monocots   
b. dicots   
c. both monocots and dicots   
d. neither monocots nor dicots

12. Roots that enable a plant to grow on another plant are called

a. epiphytic roots b. prop roots c. adventitious roots d. aerial roots

13. The forces selective uptake of minerals in the root.

a. pericycle b. epidermis c. endodermis d. root cap

14. Newly-formed root cells begin to form different cell types in the

a. zone of elongation b. zone of maturation c. root meristem d. zone of cell division

15. The stalk of a leaf is known as the

a. petiole b. lamina c. stipule d. rachis

16. Leaflets are a characteristic of leaves.

a. alternate b. whorled c. compound d. opposite

17. Cells of the contain chloroplasts.

a. epidermis b. vascular tissue c. stomata d. mesophyll

18. Which of the following is most likely to be found in a desert environment?

a. broad leaves to capture sunlight b. spines instead of leaves c. needle-like leaves d. wide, flat leaves that can float

19. When stomata open, what occurs?

a. Water vapor is lost to the external environment, increasing the rate of transpiration.   
b. Water vapor is lost to the external environment, decreasing the rate of transpiration.   
c. Water vapor enters the spaces in the mesophyll, increasing the rate of transpiration.   
d. Water vapor enters the spaces in the mesophyll, decreasing the rate of transpiration.

20. Which cells are responsible for the movement of photosynthates through a plant?

a. tracheids, vessel elements b. tracheids, companion cells c. vessel elements, companion cells d. sieve-tube elements, companion cells

21. The main photoreceptor that triggers phototropism is a

a. phytochrome b. cryptochrome c. phototropin d. carotenoid

22. Phytochrome is a plant pigment protein that:

a. mediates plant infection   
b. promotes plant growth   
c. mediates morphological changes in response to red and far-red light   
d. inhibits plant growth

23. A mutant plant has roots that grow in all directions. Which of the following organelles would you expect to be missing in the cell?

a. mitochondria b. amyloplast c. chloroplast d. nucleus

24. After buying green bananas or unripe avocadoes, they can be kept in a brown bag to ripen. The hormone released by the fruit and trapped in the bag is probably:

a. abscisic acid b. cytokinin c. ethylene d. gibberellic acid

25. A decrease in the level of which hormone releases seeds from dormancy?

a. abscisic acid b. cytokinin c. ethylene d. gibberellic acid

26. A seedling germinating under a stone grows at an angle away from the stone and upward. This response to touch is called

a. gravitropism b. thigmonasty c. thigmotropism d. skototropism

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

27. What type of meristem is found only in monocots, such as lawn grasses? Explain how this type of meristematic tissue is beneficial in lawn grasses that are mowed each week.

28. Which plant part is responsible for transporting water, minerals, and sugars to different parts of the plant? Name the two types of tissue that make up this overall tissue, and explain the role of each.

29. Describe the roles played by stomata and guard cells. What would happen to a plant if these cells did not function correctly?   
30. Compare the structure and function of xylem to that of phloem.   
31. Explain the role of the cork cambium in woody plants.   
32. What is the function of lenticels?   
33. Besides the age of a tree, what additional information can annual rings reveal?   
34. Give two examples of modified stems and explain how each example benefits the plant.   
35. Compare a tap root system with a fibrous root system. For each type, name a plant that provides a food in the human diet. Which type of root system is found in monocots? Which type of root system is found in dicots?   
36. What might happen to a root if the pericycle disappeared?   
37. How do dicots differ from monocots in terms of leaf structure?   
38. Describe an example of a plant with leaves that are adapted to cold temperatures.   
39. The process of bulk flow transports fluids in a plant. Describe the two main bulk flow processes.   
40. Owners and managers of plant nurseries have to plan lighting schedules for a long-day plant that will flower in February. What lighting periods will be most effective? What color of light should be chosen?   
41. What are the major benefits of gravitropism for a germinating seedling?   
42. Fruit and vegetable storage facilities are usually refrigerated and well ventilated. Why are these conditions advantageous?   
43. Stomata close in response to bacterial infection. Why is this response a mechanism of defense for the plant? Which hormone is most likely to mediate this response?