12.5.1 SIMD – Vector Processors

Background

Let us consider the problem of adding two  element arrays. In a single threaded implementation, we need to load the operands from memory, add the operands, and store the result in memory. Consequently, for computing each element of the destination array, we require two load instructions, one add instruction, and one store instruction. Traditional processors try to attain speedups by exploiting the fact that we can compute  ), in parallel with  ) because these two operations do not have any dependencies between them. Hence, it is possible to increase IPC by executing many such operations in parallel.

Let us now consider superscalar processors. If they can issue 4 instructions per cycle, then their IPC can at the most be 4 times that of a single cycle processor. In practice, the peak speedup over a single cycle processor that we can achieve with such inherently parallel array processing operations is around 3 to 3.5 times for a 4 issue processor. Secondly, this method of increasing IPC by having wide issue widths is not scalable. We do not have 8 or 10 issue processors in practice because the logic of the pipeline gets very complicated, and the area/power overheads become prohibitive.

Hence, designers decided to have special support for vector operations that operate on large vectors (arrays) of data. Such processors were known as vector processors. The main idea here is to process an entire array of data at once. Normal processors use regular scalar data types such as integers and floating point numbers; whereas, vector processors use vector data types, which are essentially arrays of scalar data types.

Definition 132

 vector processor considers a vector of primitive data types (integer or floating point numbers) as its basic unit of information. It can load, store, and perform arithmetic operations on entire vectors at once. Such instructions that operate on vectors of data, are known as vector instructions.

One of the most iconic products that predominantly used vector processors was the Cray 1 Supercomputer. Such supercomputers were primarily used for scientific applications that mainly consisted of linear algebra operations. Such operations work on vectors of data and matrices, and are thus well suited to be run on vector processors. Sadly, beyond the realm of high intensity scientific computing, vector processors did not find a general purpose market till the late nineties.

In the late nineties, personal computers started to be used for research, and for running scientific applications. Secondly, instead of designing custom processors for supercomputers, designers started to use regular commodity processors for building supercomputers. Since then, the trend continued till the evolution of graphics processors. Most supercomputers between 1995 and 2010, consisted of thousands of commodity processors. Another important reason to have vector instructions in a regular processor was to support high intensity gaming. Gaming requires a massive amount of graphics processing. For example, modern games render complex scenes with multiple characters, and thousands of visual effects. Most of these visual effects such as illumination, shadows, animation, depth, and color processing, are at its core basic linear algebra operations on matrices containing points or pixels. Due to these factors regular processors started to incorporate a limited amount of vector support. Specifically, the Intel processors provided the MMX, SSE 1-4 vector instruction sets, AMD processors provided the 3DNow! vector extensions, and ARM processors provide the ARM  Neon  vector ISA. There are a lot of commonalities between these ISAs, and hence let us not focus on any specific ISA. Let us instead discuss the broad principles behind the design and operation of vector processors.