19.3 Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Outline the basic premise of crystal field theory (CFT)   
• Identify molecular geometries associated with various d-orbital splitting patterns   
• Predict electron configurations of split d orbitals for selected transition metal atoms or ions   
• Explain spectral and magnetic properties in terms of CFT concepts

The behavior of coordination compounds cannot be adequately explained by the same theories used for main group element chemistry. The observed geometries of coordination complexes are not consistent with hybridized orbitals on the central metal overlapping with ligand orbitals, as would be predicted by valence bond theory. The observed colors indicate that the  orbitals often occur at different energy levels rather than all being degenerate, that is, of equal energy, as are the three  orbitals. To explain the stabilities, structures, colors, and magnetic properties of transition metal complexes, a different bonding model has been developed. Just as valence bond theory explains many aspects of bonding in main group chemistry, crystal field theory is useful in understanding and predicting the behavior of transition metal complexes.

Crystal Field Theory

To explain the observed behavior of transition metal complexes (such as how colors arise), a model involving electrostatic interactions between the electrons from the ligands and the electrons in the unhybridized d orbitals of the central metal atom has been developed. This electrostatic model is crystal field theory (CFT). It allows us to understand, interpret, and predict the colors, magnetic behavior, and some structures of coordination compounds of transition metals.

CFT focuses on the nonbonding electrons on the central metal ion in coordination complexes not on the metalligand bonds. Like valence bond theory, CFT tells only part of the story of the behavior of complexes. However, it tells the part that valence bond theory does not. In its pure form, CFT ignores any covalent bonding between ligands and metal ions. Both the ligand and the metal are treated as infinitesimally small point charges.

All electrons are negative, so the electrons donated from the ligands will repel the electrons of the central metal. Let us consider the behavior of the electrons in the unhybridized dorbitals in an octahedral complex. The five  orbitals consist of lobe-shaped regions and are arranged in space, as shown in Figure 19.33. In an octahedral complex, the six ligands coordinate along the axes.

In an uncomplexed metal ion in the gas phase, the electrons are distributed among the five  orbitals in accord with Hund's rule because the orbitals all have the same energy. However, when ligands coordinate to a metal ion, the energies of the  orbitals are no longer the same.

In octahedral complexes, the lobes in two of the five  orbitals, the  and  orbitals, point toward the ligands (Figure 19.33). These two orbitals are called the  orbitals (the symbol actually refers to the symmetry of the orbitals, but we will use it as a convenient name for these two orbitals in an octahedral complex). The other three orbitals, the  and  orbitals, have lobes that point between the ligands and are called the  orbitals (again, the symbol really refers to the symmetry of the orbitals). As six ligands approach the metal ion along the axes of the octahedron, their point charges repel the electrons in the  orbitals of the metal ion. However, the repulsions between the electrons in the  orbitals (the  and  orbitals) and the ligands are greater than the repulsions between the electrons in the  orbitals (the  and  orbitals) and the ligands. This is because the lobes of the  orbitals point directly at the ligands, whereas the lobes of the  orbitals point between them. Thus, electrons in the  orbitals of the metal ion in an octahedral complex have higher potential energies than those of electrons in the  orbitals. The difference in energy may be represented as shown in Figure 19.34.

The difference in energy between the  and the  orbitals is called the crystal field splitting and is symbolized by  , where oct stands for octahedral.

The magnitude of  depends on many factors, including the nature of the six ligands located around the central metal ion, the charge on the metal, and whether the metal is using  , or  orbitals. Different ligands produce different crystal field splittings. The increasing crystal field splitting produced by ligands is expressed in the spectrochemical series, a short version of which is given here:

In this series, ligands on the left cause small crystal field splittings and are weak-field ligands, whereas those on the right cause larger splittings and are strong-field ligands. Thus, the  value for an octahedral complex with iodide ligands  is much smaller than the  value for the same metal with cyanide ligands  .

Electrons in the  orbitals follow the aufbau (“filling up”) principle, which says that the orbitals will be filled to give the lowest total energy, just as in main group chemistry. When two electrons occupy the same orbital, the like charges repel each other. The energy needed to pair up two electrons in a single orbital is called the pairing energy (P). Electrons will always singly occupy each orbital in a degenerate set before pairing. P is similar in magnitude to  . When electrons fill the  orbitals, the relative magnitudes of  and  determine which orbitals will be occupied.

In  , the strong field of six cyanide ligands produces a large  . Under these conditions, the electrons require less energy to pair than they require to be excited to the  orbitals  . The six  electrons of the  ion pair in the three  orbitals (Figure 19.35). Complexes in which the electrons are paired because of the large crystal field splitting are called low-spin complexes because the number of unpaired electrons (spins) is minimized.

In  , on the other hand, the weak field of the water molecules produces only a small crystal field splitting  ). Because it requires less energy for the electrons to occupy the  orbitals than to pair together, there will be an electron in each of the five  orbitals before pairing occurs. For the six  electrons on the iron(II) center in  , there will be one pair of electrons and four unpaired electrons (Figure 19.35). Complexes such as the  ion, in which the electrons are unpaired because the crystal field splitting is not large enough to cause them to pair, are called high-spin complexes because the number of unpaired electrons (spins) is maximized.

A similar line of reasoning shows why the  ion is a low-spin complex with only one unpaired electron, whereas both the  and  ions are high-spin complexes with five unpaired electrons.

EXAMPLE 19.7

High- and Low-Spin Complexes

Predict the number of unpaired electrons.

(a)  (b) 

(c) 

Solution

The complexes are octahedral.

(a)  has a  configuration. These electrons will all be unpaired.

(b)  is  , so there will be one unpaired electron.

(c)  has  valence electrons, so the crystal field splitting will determine how many are paired. Nitrite is a strong-field ligand, so the complex will be low spin. Six electrons will go in the  orbitals, leaving 0 unpaired.

Check Your Learning

The size of the crystal field splitting only influences the arrangement of electrons when there is a choice between pairing electrons and filling the higher-energy orbitals. For which  -electron configurations will there be a difference between high- and low-spin configurations in octahedral complexes?

Answer:

 , and 

EXAMPLE 19.8

CFT for Other Geometries

CFT is applicable to molecules in geometries other than octahedral. In octahedral complexes, remember that the lobes of the  set point directly at the ligands. For tetrahedral complexes, the  orbitals remain in place, but now we have only four ligands located between the axes (Figure 19.36). None of the orbitals points directly at the tetrahedral ligands. However, the  set (along the Cartesian axes) overlaps with the ligands less than does the  set. By analogy with the octahedral case, predict the energy diagram for the  orbitals in a tetrahedral crystal field. To avoid confusion, the octahedral  set becomes a tetrahedral  set, and the octahedral  set becomes a  set.

Solution

Since CFT is based on electrostatic repulsion, the orbitals closer to the ligands will be destabilized and raised in energy relative to the other set of orbitals. The splitting is less than for octahedral complexes because the overlap is less, so  is usually small  ）：

Check Your Learning

Explain how many unpaired electrons a tetrahedral  ion will have.

Answer:

4; because  is small, all tetrahedral complexes are high spin and the electrons go into the  orbitals before pairing

The other common geometry is square planar. It is possible to consider a square planar geometry as an octahedral structure with a pair of transligands removed. The removed ligands are assumed to be on the z-axis. This changes the distribution of the  orbitals, as orbitals on or near the  -axis become more stable, and those on or near the  or y-axes become less stable. This results in the octahedral  and the  sets splitting and gives a more complicated pattern, as depicted below:

Magnetic Moments of Molecules and Ions

Experimental evidence of magnetic measurements supports the theory of high- and low-spin complexes. Remember that molecules such as  that contain unpaired electrons are paramagnetic. Paramagnetic substances are attracted to magnetic fields. Many transition metal complexes have unpaired electrons and hence are paramagnetic. Molecules such as  and ions such as  and  that contain no unpaired electrons are diamagnetic. Diamagnetic substances have a slight tendency to be repelled by magnetic fields.

When an electron in an atom or ion is unpaired, the magnetic moment due to its spin makes the entire atom or ion paramagnetic. The size of the magnetic moment of a system containing unpaired electrons is related directly to the number of such electrons: the greater the number of unpaired electrons, the larger the magnetic moment. Therefore, the observed magnetic moment is used to determine the number of unpaired electrons present. The measured magnetic moment of low-spin   confirms that iron is diamagnetic,

whereas high-spin  has four unpaired electrons with a magnetic moment that confirms this arrangement.

Colors of Transition Metal Complexes

When atoms or molecules absorb light at the proper frequency, their electrons are excited to higher-energy orbitals. For many main group atoms and molecules, the absorbed photons are in the ultraviolet range of the electromagnetic spectrum, which cannot be detected by the human eye. For coordination compounds, the energy difference between the  orbitals often allows photons in the visible range to be absorbed.

The human eye perceives a mixture of all the colors, in the proportions present in sunlight, as white light. Complementary colors, those located across from each other on a color wheel, are also used in color vision. The eye perceives a mixture of two complementary colors, in the proper proportions, as white light. Likewise, when a color is missing from white light, the eye sees its complement. For example, when red photons are absorbed from white light, the eyes see the color green. When violet photons are removed from white light, the eyes see lemon yellow. The blue color of the  ion results because this ion absorbs orange and red light, leaving the complementary colors of blue and green (Figure 19.37).

EXAMPLE 19.9

Colors of Complexes

The octahedral complex  has a single delectron. To excite this electron from the ground state  orbital to the  orbital, this complex absorbs light from 450 to  . The maximum absorbance corresponds to  and occurs at  . Calculate the value of  in Joules and predict what color the solution will appear.

Solution

Using Planck's equation (refer to the section on electromagnetic energy), we calculate:

Because the complex absorbs  (orange) through 450 (blue), the indigo, violet, and red wavelengths will be transmitted, and the complex will appear purple.

Check Your Learning

A complex that appears green, absorbs photons of what wavelengths?

Answer: red, 620–800 nm

Small changes in the relative energies of the orbitals that electrons are transitioning between can lead to drastic shifts in the color of light absorbed. Therefore, the colors of coordination compounds depend on many factors. As shown in Figure 19.38, different aqueous metal ions can have different colors. In addition, different oxidation states of one metal can produce different colors, as shown for the vanadium complexes in the link below.

The specific ligands coordinated to the metal center also influence the color of coordination complexes. For example, the iron(II) complex  appears blue-green because the high-spin complex absorbs photons in the red wavelengths (Figure 19.39). In contrast, the low-spin iron(II) complex  appears pale yellow because it absorbs higher-energy violet photons.

LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/16vanadium) of the reduction of vanadium complexes to observe the colorful effect of changing oxidation states.

In general, strong-field ligands cause a large split in the energies of  orbitals of the central metal atom (large  . Transition metal coordination compounds with these ligands are yellow, orange, or red because they absorb higher-energy violet or blue light. On the other hand, coordination compounds of transition metals with weak-field ligands are often blue-green, blue, or indigo because they absorb lower-energy yellow, orange, or red light.

A coordination compound of the  ion has a  configuration, and all the  orbitals are filled. To excite an electron to a higher level, such as the  orbital, photons of very high energy are necessary. This energy corresponds to very short wavelengths in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum. No visible light is absorbed, so the eye sees no change, and the compound appears white or colorless. A solution containing  , for example, is colorless. On the other hand, octahedral  complexes have a vacancy in the  orbitals, and electrons can be excited to this level. The wavelength (energy) of the light absorbed corresponds to the visible part of the spectrum, and  complexes are almost always colored—blue, blue-green violet, or yellow (Figure 19.40). Although CFT successfully describes many properties of coordination complexes, molecular orbital explanations (beyond the introductory scope provided here) are required to understand fully the behavior of coordination complexes.

Key Terms

actinide series (also, actinoid series) actinium an the elements in the second row or the  block, atomic numbers 89–103   
bidentate ligand ligand that coordinates to one central metal through coordinate bonds from two different atoms   
central metal ion or atom to which one or more ligands is attached through coordinate covalent bonds   
chelate complex formed from a polydentate ligand attached to a central metal   
chelating ligand ligand that attaches to a central metal ion by bonds from two or more donor atoms   
cisconfiguration configuration of a geometrical isomer in which two similar groups are on the same side of an imaginary reference line on the molecule   
coordination compound stable compound in which the central metal atom or ion acts as a Lewis acid and accepts one or more pairs of electrons   
coordination compound substance consisting of atoms, molecules, or ions attached to a central atom through Lewis acid-base interactions   
coordination number number of coordinate covalent bonds to the central metal atom in a complex or the number of closest contacts to an atom in a crystalline form   
coordination sphere central metal atom or ion plus the attached ligands of a complex   
crystal field splitting  difference in energy between the  and  sets or  and  sets of orbitals   
crystal field theory model that explains the energies of the orbitals in transition metals in terms of electrostatic interactions with the ligands but does not include metal ligand bonding   
 -block element one of the elements in groups 3–11 with valence electrons in  orbitals   
donor atom atom in a ligand with a lone pair of electrons that forms a coordinate covalent bond to a central metal   
 orbitals set of two  orbitals that are oriented on the Cartesian axes for coordination complexes; in octahedral complexes, they are higher in energy than the  orbitals   
f-block element (also, inner transition element) one of the elements with atomic numbers 58–71 or 90–103 that have valence electrons in  orbitals; they are frequently shown offset below the periodic table   
first transition series transition elements in the fourth period of the periodic table (first row of the  -block), atomic numbers 21–29   
fourth transition series transition elements in the seventh period of the periodic table (fourth row of the  -block), atomic numbers 89 and 104–111   
geometric isomers isomers that differ in the way in which atoms are oriented in space relative to each other, leading to different physical and chemical properties   
high-spin complex complex in which the electrons maximize the total electron spin by singly populating all of the orbitals before pairing two electrons into the lower-energy orbitals   
hydrometallurgy process in which a metal is separated from a mixture by first converting it into soluble ions, extracting the ions, and then reducing the ions to precipitate the pure metal   
ionization isomer (or coordination isomer) isomer in which an anionic ligand is replaced by the counter ion in the inner coordination sphere   
lanthanide series (also, lanthanoid series) lanthanum and the elements in the first row or the  block, atomic numbers 57–71   
ligand ion or neutral molecule attached to the central metal ion in a coordination compound   
linkage isomer coordination compound that possesses a ligand that can bind to the transition metal in two different ways    
low-spin complex complex in which the electrons minimize the total electron spin by pairing in the lower-energy orbitals before populating the higher-energy orbitals   
monodentate ligand that attaches to a central metal through just one coordinate covalent bond   
optical isomer (also, enantiomer) molecule that is a nonsuperimposable mirror image with identical chemical and physical properties, except when it reacts with other optical isomers   
pairing energy (P) energy required to place two electrons with opposite spins into a single orbital   
platinum metals group of six transition metals consisting of ruthenium, osmium, rhodium, iridium, palladium, and platinum that tend to occur in the same minerals and demonstrate similar chemical properties   
polydentate ligand ligand that is attached to a central metal ion by bonds from two or more donor atoms, named with prefixes specifying how many donors are present (e.g., hexadentate  six coordinate bonds formed)   
rare earth element collection of 17 elements including the lanthanides, scandium, and yttrium that often occur together and have similar chemical properties, making separation difficult   
second transition series transition elements in the fifth period of the periodic table (second row of the  -block), atomic numbers 39–47   
smelting process of extracting a pure metal from a molten ore   
spectrochemical series ranking of ligands according to the magnitude of the crystal field splitting they induce   
steel material made from iron by removing impurities in the iron and adding substances that produce alloys with properties suitable for specific uses   
strong-field ligand ligand that causes larger crystal field splittings   
superconductor material that conducts electricity with no resistance   
 orbitals set of three  orbitals aligned between the Cartesian axes for coordination complexes; in octahedral complexes, they are lowered in energy compared to the  orbitals according to CFT   
third transition series transition elements in the sixth period of the periodic table (third row of the  -block), atomic numbers 57 and 72–79   
transconfiguration configuration of a geometrical isomer in which two similar groups are on opposite sides of an imaginary reference line on the molecule   
weak-field ligand ligand that causes small crystal field splittings

Summary

19.1 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds

The transition metals are elements with partially filled  orbitals, located in the  -block of the periodic table. The reactivity of the transition elements varies widely from very active metals such as scandium and iron to almost inert elements, such as the platinum metals. The type of chemistry used in the isolation of the elements from their ores depends upon the concentration of the element in its ore and the difficulty of reducing ions of the elements to the metals. Metals that are more active are more difficult to reduce.

Transition metals exhibit chemical behavior typical of metals. For example, they oxidize in air upon heating and react with elemental halogens to form halides. Those elements that lie above hydrogen in the activity series react with acids, producing salts and hydrogen gas. Oxides, hydroxides, and carbonates of transition metal compounds in low oxidation states are basic. Halides and other salts are generally stable in water, although oxygen must be excluded in some cases. Most transition metals form a variety of stable oxidation states, allowing them to demonstrate a wide range of chemical reactivity.

19.2 Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals

The transition elements and main group elements can form coordination compounds, or complexes, in which a central metal atom or ion is bonded to one or more ligands by coordinate covalent bonds. Ligands with more than one donor atom are called polydentate ligands and form chelates. The common geometries found in complexes are tetrahedral and square planar (both with a coordination number of four) and octahedral (with a coordination number of six). Cisand transconfigurations are possible in some octahedral and square planar complexes. In addition to these geometrical isomers, optical isomers (molecules or ions that are mirror images but not superimposable) are possible in certain octahedral complexes. Coordination complexes have a wide variety of uses including oxygen transport in blood, water purification, and pharmaceutical use.

19.3 Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds

Crystal field theory treats interactions between the electrons on the metal and the ligands as a simple electrostatic effect. The presence of the ligands near the metal ion changes the energies of the metal  orbitals relative to their energies in the free ion. Both the color and the magnetic properties of a complex can be attributed to this crystal field splitting. The magnitude of the splitting  depends on the nature of the ligands bonded to the metal. Strongfield ligands produce large splitting and favor lowspin complexes, in which the  orbitals are completely filled before any electrons occupy the  orbitals. Weak-field ligands favor formation of highspin complexes. The  and the  orbitals are singly occupied before any are doubly occupied.

Exercises

19.1 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds

1. Write the electron configurations for each of the following elements:

(a) Sc (b) Ti (c) Cr (d) Fe (e) Ru

2. Write the electron configurations for each of the following elements and its ions:

(a) Ti (b) Ti2+ (c) Ti3+ (d) Ti4+

3. Write the electron configurations for each of the following elements and its  ions:

(a) La (b)  (c) Lu

4. Why are the lanthanoid elements not found in nature in their elemental forms?

5. Which of the following elements is most likely to be used to prepare La by the reduction of  : Al, C, or Fe? Why?

6. Which of the following is the strongest oxidizing agent:   or 

7. Which of the following elements is most likely to form an oxide with the formula  : Zr, Nb, or M

8. The following reactions all occur in a blast furnace. Which of these are redox reactions?

(a)    
(b)    
(c)    
(d)    
(e)    
(f )    


9. Why is the formation of slag useful during the smelting of iron?

10. Would you expect an aqueous manganese(VII) oxide solution to have a pH greater or less than 7.0? Justify your answer.

11. Iron(II) can be oxidized to iron(III) by dichromate ion, which is reduced to chromium(III) in acid solution. A 2.5000-g sample of iron ore is dissolved and the iron converted into iron(II). Exactly  of 0.0100  is required in the titration. What percentage of the ore sample was iron?

12. How many cubic feet of air at a pressure of 760 torr and  is required per ton of  to convert that  into iron in a blast furnace? For this exercise, assume air is  oxygen by volume.

13. Find the potentials of the following electrochemical cell: Cd |  ,  ,  Ni

14. A  sample of a pure solid alkali metal chloride is dissolved in water and treated with excess silver nitrate. The resulting precipitate, filtered and dried, weighs 3.03707 g. What was the percent by mass of chloride ion in the original compound? What is the identity of the salt?

15. The standard reduction potential for the reaction  is about  . The reduction potential for the reaction  is  . Calculate the cell potentials to show whether the complex ions,  , can be oxidized to the corresponding cobalt(III) complex by oxygen.

16. Predict the products of each of the following reactions. (Note: In addition to using the information in this chapter, also use the knowledge you have accumulated at this stage of your study, including information on the prediction of reaction products.) (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) 

17. Predict the products of each of the following reactions. (Note: In addition to using the information in this chapter, also use the knowledge you have accumulated at this stage of your study, including information on the prediction of reaction products.) (a)  1 (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f ) 

18. Describe the electrolytic process for refining copper.

19. Predict the products of the following reactions and balance the equations. (a) Zn is added to a solution of  in acid. (b)  is added to a solution containing an excess of  in hydrochloric acid. (c)  is added to  in acid solution. (d) Mn is heated with  . (e) CrO is added to  in water. (f )  is added to an aqueous solution of NaOH.

20. What is the gas produced when iron(II) sulfide is treated with a nonoxidizing acid?

21. Predict the products of each of the following reactions and then balance the chemical equations. (a) Fe is heated in an atmosphere of steam. (b) NaOH is added to a solution of  . (c)  is added to an acidic solution of  . (d) Fe is added to a dilute solution of  . (e) A solution of  and  is allowed to stand in air. (f )  is added to a solution of  . (g) Fe is heated in air.

22. Balance the following equations by oxidation-reduction methods; note that thre elements change oxidation state.    
23. Dilute sodium cyanide solution is slowly dripped into a slowly stirred silver nitrate solution. A white precipitate forms temporarily but dissolves as the addition of sodium cyanide continues. Use chemical equations to explain this observation. Silver cyanide is similar to silver chloride in its solubility.   
24. Predict which will be more stable,  or  , and explain.

25. Give the oxidation state of the metal for each of the following oxides of the first transition series. (Hint: Oxides of formula  are examples of mixedvalencecompoundsin which the metal ion is present in more than one oxidation state. It is possible to write these compound formulas in the equivalent format  , to permit estimation of the metal’s two oxidation states.)

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g)  (h) NiO (i) 

19.2 Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals

26. Indicate the coordination number for the central metal atom in each of the following coordination compounds: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )   ethylenediamine,  )

27. Give the coordination numbers and write the formulas for each of the following, including all isomers where appropriate: (a) tetrahydroxozincate(II) ion (tetrahedral) (b) hexacyanopalladate(IV) ion (c) dichloroaurate(I) ion (note that aurumis Latin for "gold") (d) diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (e) potassium diamminetetrachlorochromate(III) (f) hexaamminecobalt(III) hexacyanochromate(III) (g) dibromobis(ethylenediamine) cobalt(III) nitrate

28. Give the coordination number for each metal ion in the following compounds: (a)  (note that  is bidentate in this complex) (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (square planar) (g)  (h) 

29. Sketch the structures of the following complexes. Indicate any cis, trans, and optical isomers. (a)  (square planar) (b)  (square planar, py  pyridine,  ) (c)  (tetrahedral) (d)  (square planar) (e)  (f )  (note that  is the bidentate oxalate ion,  ）

30. Draw diagrams for any cis, trans, and optical isomers that could exist for the following (en is ethylenediamine):

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) 

31. Name each of the compounds or ions given in Exercise 19.28, including the oxidation state of the metal.

32. Name each of the compounds or ions given in Exercise 19.30.

33. Specify whether the following complexes have isomers. (a) tetrahedral  (b) trigonal bipyramidal  (c) 

34. Predict whether the carbonate ligand  will coordinate to a metal center as a monodentate, bidentate, or tridentate ligand.

35. Draw the geometric, linkage, and ionization isomers for  .

19.3 Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds

36. Determine the number of unpaired electrons expected for  for  in terms of crystal field theory.   
37. Draw the crystal field diagrams for  and  . State whether each complex is high spin or low spin, paramagnetic or diamagnetic, and compare  to  for each complex.   
38. Give the oxidation state of the metal, number of  electrons, and the number of unpaired electrons predicted for  .   
39. The solid anhydrous solid  is blue in color. Because it readily absorbs water from the air, it is used as a humidity indicator to monitor if equipment (such as a cell phone) has been exposed to excessive levels of moisture. Predict what product is formed by this reaction, and how many unpaired electrons this complex will have.

40. Is it possible for a complex of a metal in the transition series to have six unpaired electrons? Explain.

41. How many unpaired electrons are present in each of the following? (a)  (high spin) (b)  (low spin) (c)  (low spin) (d)  (high spin) (e)  (low spin)

42. Explain how the diphosphate ion,  , can function as a water softener that prevents the precipitation of  as an insoluble iron salt.

43. For complexes of the same metal ion with no change in oxidation number, the stability increases as the number of electrons in the  orbitals increases. Which complex in each of the following pairs of complexes is more stable? (a)  or  (b)  or  (c)  or 

44. Trimethylphosphine,  , can act as a ligand by donating the lone pair of electrons on the phosphorus atom. If trimethylphosphine is added to a solution of nickel(II) chloride in acetone, a blue compound that has a molecular mass of approximately  and contains  Ni,  Cl, and  can be isolated. This blue compound does not have any isomeric forms. What are the geometry and molecular formula of the blue compound?

45. Would you expect the complex  to have any unpaired electrons? Any isomers?

46. Would you expect the  to be diamagnetic or paramagnetic? Explain your reasoning

47. Would you expect salts of the gold(I) ion,  , to be colored? Explain.

48.  is green.  blue. Which absorbs higher-energy photons? Which is predicted to have a larger crystal field splitting?