1.2 Themes and Concepts of Biology

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Identify and describe the properties of life Describe the levels of organization among living things Recognize and interpret a phylogenetic tree List examples of different subdisciplines in biology

Biology is the science that studies life, but what exactly is life? This may sound like a silly question with an obvious response, but it is not always easy to define life. For example, a branch of biology called virology studies viruses, which exhibit some of the characteristics of living entities but lack others. Although viruses can attack living organisms, cause diseases, and even reproduce, they do not meet the criteria that biologists use to define life. Consequently, virologists are not biologists, strictly speaking. Similarly, some biologists study the early molecular evolution that gave rise to life. Since the events that preceded life are not biological events, these scientists are also excluded from biology in the strict sense of the term.

From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with three questions: What are the shared properties that make something “alive”? Once we know something is alive, how do we find meaningful levels of organization in its structure? Finally, when faced with the remarkable diversity of life, how do we organize the different kinds of organisms so that we can better understand them? As scientists discover new organisms every day, biologists continue to seek answers to these and other questions.

Properties of Life

All living organisms share several key characteristics or functions: order, sensitivity or response to the environment, reproduction, adaptation, growth and development, regulation/homeostasis, energy processing, and evolution. When viewed together, these eight characteristics serve to define life.

Order

Organisms are highly organized, coordinated structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, single-celled organisms are remarkably complex: inside each cell, atoms comprise molecules. These in turn comprise cell organelles and other cellular inclusions. In multicellular organisms (Figure 1.10), similar cells form tissues. Tissues, in turn, collaborate to create organs (body structures with a distinct function). Organs work together to form organ systems.

Sensitivity or Response to Stimuli

Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can bend toward a source of light, climb on fences and walls, or respond to touch (Figure 1.11). Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals (a process called chemotaxis) or light (phototaxis). Movement toward a stimulus is a positive response, while movement away from a stimulus is a negative response.

LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/movement_plants) to see how plants respond to a stimulus—from opening to light, to wrapping a tendril around a branch, to capturing prey.

Reproduction

Single-celled organisms reproduce by first duplicating their DNA, and then dividing it equally as the cell prepares to divide to form two new cells. Multicellular organisms often produce specialized reproductive germline, gamete, oocyte, and sperm cells. After fertilization (the fusion of an oocyte and a sperm cell), a new individual develops. When reproduction occurs, DNA

containing genes are passed along to an organism’s offspring. These genes ensure that the offspring will belong to the same species and will have similar characteristics, such as size and shape.

Adaptation

All living organisms exhibit a “fit” to their environment. Biologists refer to this fit as adaptation, and it is a consequence of evolution by natural selection, which operates in every lineage of reproducing organisms. Examples of adaptations are diverse and unique, from heat-resistant Archaea that live in boiling hotsprings to the tongue length of a nectar-feeding moth that matches the size of the flower from which it feeds. All adaptations enhance the reproductive potential of the individuals exhibiting them, including their ability to survive to reproduce. Adaptations are not constant. As an environment changes, natural selection causes the characteristics of the individuals in a population to track those changes.

Growth and Development

Organisms grow and develop as a result of genes providing specific instructions that will direct cellular growth and development. This ensures that a species’ young (Figure 1.12) will grow up to exhibit many of the same characteristics as its parents.

Regulation/Homeostasis

Even the smallest organisms are complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate internal functions, respond to stimuli, and cope with environmental stresses. Two examples of internal functions regulated in an organism are nutrient transport and blood flow. Organs (groups of tissues working together) perform specific functions, such as carrying oxygen throughout the body, removing wastes, delivering nutrients to every cell, and cooling the body.

In order to function properly, cells require appropriate conditions such as proper temperature, pH, and appropriate concentration of diverse chemicals. These conditions may, however, change from one moment to the next. Organisms are able to maintain internal conditions within a narrow range almost constantly, despite environmental changes, through homeostasis (literally, “steady state”). For example, an organism needs to regulate body temperature through the thermoregulation process. Organisms that live in cold climates, such as the polar bear (Figure 1.13), have body structures that help them withstand low temperatures and conserve body heat. Structures that aid in this type of insulation include fur, feathers, blubber, and fat. In hot climates, organisms have methods (such as perspiration in humans or panting in dogs) that help them to shed excess body heat.

Energy Processing

All organisms use a source of energy for their metabolic activities. Some organisms capture energy from the sun and convert it into chemical energy in food. Others use chemical energy in molecules they take in as food (Figure 1.14).

Evolution

The diversity of life on Earth is a result of mutations, or random changes in hereditary material over time. These mutations allow the possibility for organisms to adapt to a changing environment. An organism that evolves characteristics fit for the environment will have greater reproductive success, subject to the forces of natural selection.

Levels of Organization of Living Things

Living things are highly organized and structured, following a hierarchy that we can examine on a scale from small to large. The atom is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. It consists of a nucleus surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules. A molecule is a chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms held together by one or more chemical bonds. Many molecules that are biologically important are macromolecules, large molecules that are typically formed by polymerization (a polymer is a large molecule that is made by combining smaller units called monomers, which are simpler than macromolecules). An example of a macromolecule is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (Figure 1.15), which contains the instructions for the structure and functioning of all living organisms.

LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/rotating_DNA) that animates the three-dimensional structure of the DNA molecule in Figure 1.15.

Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surrounded by membranes. We call these organelles. Organelles are small structures that exist within cells. Examples of organelles include mitochondria and chloroplasts, which carry out indispensable functions: mitochondria produce energy to power the cell, while chloroplasts enable green plants to utilize the energy in sunlight to make sugars. All living things are made of cells. The cell itself is the smallest fundamental unit of structure and function in living organisms. (This requirement is why scientists do not consider viruses living: they are not made of cells. To make new viruses, they have to invade and hijack the reproductive mechanism of a living cell. Only then can they obtain the materials they need to reproduce.) Some organisms consist of a single cell and others are multicellular. Scientists classify cells as prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Prokaryotes are single-celled or colonial organisms that do not have membrane-bound nuclei. In contrast, the cells of eukaryotes do have membrane-bound organelles and a membrane-bound nucleus.

In larger organisms, cells combine to make tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out similar or related functions. Organs are collections of tissues grouped together performing a common function. Organs are present not only in animals but also in plants. An organ system is a higher level of organization that consists of functionally related organs. Mammals have many organ systems. For instance, the circulatory system transports blood through the body and to and from the lungs. It includes organs such as the heart and blood vessels. Organisms are individual living entities. For example, each tree in a forest is an organism. Single-celled prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are also organisms, which biologists typically call microorganisms.

Biologists collectively call all the individuals of a species living within a specific area a population. For example, a forest may include many pine trees, which represent the population of pine trees in this forest. Different populations may live in the same specific area. For example, the forest with the pine trees includes populations of flowering plants, insects, and microbial populations. A community is the sum of populations inhabiting a particular area. For instance, all of the trees, flowers, insects, and other populations in a forest form the forest’s community. The forest itself is an ecosystem. An ecosystem consists of all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic, nonliving parts of that environment such as nitrogen in the soil or rain water. At the highest level of organization (Figure 1.16), the biosphere is the collection of all ecosystems, and it represents the zones of life on Earth. It includes land, water, and even the atmosphere to a certain extent.

VISUAL CONNECTION

Which of the following statements is false?

a. Tissues exist within organs which exist within organ systems.   
b. Communities exist within populations which exist within ecosystems.   
c. Organelles exist within cells which exist within tissues.   
d. Communities exist within ecosystems which exist in the biosphere.

The Diversity of Life

The fact that biology, as a science, has such a broad scope has to do with the tremendous diversity of life on earth. The source of this diversity is evolution, the process of gradual change in a population or species over time. Evolutionary biologists study the evolution of living things in everything from the microscopic world to ecosystems.

A phylogenetic tree (Figure 1.17) can summarize the evolution of various life forms on Earth. It is a diagram showing the evolutionary relationships among biological species based on similarities and differences in genetic or physical traits or both. Nodes and branches comprise a phylogenetic tree. The internal nodes represent ancestors and are points in evolution when, based on scientific evidence, researchers believe an ancestor has diverged to form two new species. The length of each branch is proportional to the time elapsed since the split.

EVOLUTION CONNECTION

Carl Woese and the Phylogenetic Tree

In the past, biologists grouped living organisms into five kingdoms: animals, plants, fungi, protists, and bacteria. They based the organizational scheme mainly on physical features, as opposed to physiology, biochemistry, or molecular biology, all of which modern systematics use. American microbiologist Carl Woese's pioneering work in the early 1970s has shown, however, that life on Earth has evolved along three lineages, now called domains—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. The first two are prokaryotic cells with microbes that lack membrane-enclosed nuclei and organelles. The third domain contains the eukaryotes and includes unicellular microorganisms (protists), together with the three remaining kingdoms (fungi, plants, and animals). Woese defined Archaea as a new domain, and this resulted in a new taxonomic tree (Figure 1.17). Many organisms belonging to the Archaea domain live under extreme conditions and are called extremophiles. To construct his tree, Woese used genetic relationships rather than similarities based on morphology (shape).

Woese constructed his tree from universally distributed comparative gene sequencing that are present in every organism, and conserved (meaning that these genes have remained essentially unchanged throughout evolution). Woese’s approach was revolutionary because comparing physical features are insufficient to differentiate between the prokaryotes that appear fairly similar in spite of their tremendous biochemical diversity and genetic variability (Figure 1.18). Comparing homologous DNA and RNA sequences provided Woese with a sensitive device that revealed the extensive variability of prokaryotes, and which justified separating the prokaryotes into two domains: bacteria and archaea.

Branches of Biological Study

The scope of biology is broad and therefore contains many branches and subdisciplines. Biologists may pursue one of those subdisciplines and work in a more focused field. For instance, molecular biology and biochemistry study biological processes at the molecular and chemical level, including interactions among molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins, as well as the way they are regulated. Microbiology, the study of microorganisms, is the study of the structure and function of single-celled organisms. It is quite a broad branch itself, and depending on the subject of study, there are also microbial physiologists, ecologists, and geneticists, among others.

CAREER CONNECTION

Forensic Scientist

Forensic science is the application of science to answer questions related to the law. Biologists as well as chemists and biochemists can be forensic scientists. Forensic scientists provide scientific evidence for use in courts, and their job involves examining trace materials associated with crimes. Interest in forensic science has increased in the last few years, possibly because of popular television shows that feature forensic scientists on the job. Also, developing molecular techniques and establishing DNA databases have expanded the types of work that forensic scientists can do. Their job activities are primarily related to crimes against people such as murder, rape, and assault. Their work involves analyzing samples such as hair, blood, and other body fluids and also processing DNA (Figure 1.19) found in many different environments and materials. Forensic scientists also analyze other biological evidence left at crime scenes, such as insect larvae or pollen grains. Students who want to pursue careers in forensic science will most likely have to take chemistry and biology courses as well as some intensive math courses.

Another field of biological study, neurobiology, studies the biology of the nervous system, and although it is a branch of biology, it is also an interdisciplinary field of study known as neuroscience. Because of its interdisciplinary nature, this subdiscipline studies different nervous system functions using molecular, cellular, developmental, medical, and computational approaches.

Paleontology, another branch of biology, uses fossils to study life’s history (Figure 1.20). Zoology and botany are the study of animals and plants, respectively. Biologists can also specialize as biotechnologists, ecologists, or physiologists, to name just a few areas. This is just a small sample of the many fields that biologists can pursue.

Biology is the culmination of the achievements of the natural sciences from their inception to today. Excitingly, it is the cradle of emerging sciences, such as the biology of brain activity, genetic engineering of custom organisms, and the biology of evolution that uses the laboratory tools of molecular biology to retrace the earliest stages of life on Earth. A scan of news headlines—whether reporting on immunizations, a newly discovered species, sports doping, or a genetically-modified food—demonstrates the way biology is active in and important to our everyday world.

KEY TERMS

abstract opening section of a scientific paper that summarizes the research and conclusions   
applied science form of science that aims to solve realworld problems   
atom smallest and most fundamental unit of matter   
basic science science that seeks to expand knowledge and understanding regardless of the short-term application of that knowledge   
biochemistry study of the chemistry of biological organisms   
biology the study of life   
biosphere collection of all the ecosystems on Earth   
botany study of plants   
cell smallest fundamental unit of structure and function in living things   
community set of populations inhabiting a particular area   
conclusion section of a scientific paper that summarizes the importance of the experimental findings   
control part of an experiment that does not change during the experiment   
deductive reasoning form of logical thinking that uses a general inclusive statement to forecast specific results   
descriptive science (also, discovery science) form of science that aims to observe, explore, and investigate   
discussion section of a scientific paper in which the author interprets experimental results, describes how variables may be related, and attempts to explain the phenomenon in question   
ecosystem all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic, nonliving parts of that environment   
eukaryote organism with cells that have nuclei and membrane-bound organelles   
evolution the process of gradual change in a population or species over time   
falsifiable able to be disproven by experimental results   
homeostasis ability of an organism to maintain constant internal conditions   
hypothesis suggested explanation for an observation, which one can test   
hypothesis-based science form of science that begins with a specific question and potential testable answers   
inductive reasoning form of logical thinking that uses related observations to arrive at a general conclusion   
introduction opening section of a scientific paper, which provides background information about what was known in the field prior to the research reported in the paper   
life science field of science, such as biology, that studies living things   
macromolecule large molecule, typically formed by the joining of smaller molecules   
materials and methods section of a scientific paper that includes a complete description of the substances,

methods, and techniques that the researchers used to gather data microbiology study of the structure and function of microorganisms molecular biology study of biological processes and their regulation at the molecular level, including interactions among molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins molecule chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms held together by one or more chemical bonds natural science field of science that is related to the physical world and its phenomena and processes neurobiology study of the biology of the nervous system organ collection of related tissues grouped together performing a common function organ system level of organization that consists of functionally related interacting organs organelle small structures that exist within cells and carry out cellular functions organism individual living entity paleontology study of life’s history by means of fossils peer-reviewed manuscript scientific paper that a scientist’s colleagues review who are experts in the field of study phylogenetic tree diagram showing the evolutionary relationships among various biological species based on similarities and differences in genetic or physical traits or both; in essence, a hypothesis concerning evolutionary connections physical science field of science, such as geology, astronomy, physics, and chemistry, that studies nonliving matter plagiarism using other people’s work or ideas without proper citation, creating the false impression that those are the author’s original ideas population all of the individuals of a species living within a specific area prokaryote single-celled organism that lacks organelles and does not have nuclei surrounded by a nuclear membrane results section of a scientific paper in which the author narrates the experimental findings and presents relevant figures, pictures, diagrams, graphs, and tables, without any further interpretation review article paper that summarizes and comments on findings that were published as primary literature science knowledge that covers general truths or the operation of general laws, especially when acquired and tested by the scientific method scientific method method of research with defined steps that include observation, formulation of a hypothesis, testing, and confirming or falsifying the hypothesis serendipity fortunate accident or a lucky surprise

theory tested and confirmed explanation for observations or phenomena tissue group of similar cells carrying out related functions

variable part of an experiment that the experimenter can vary or change   
zoology study of animals

CHAPTER SUMMARY 1.1 The Science of Biology

Biology is the science that studies living organisms and their interactions with one another and their environments. Science attempts to describe and understand the nature of the universe in whole or in part by rational means. Science has many fields. Those fields related to the physical world and its phenomena are natural sciences.

Science can be basic or applied. The main goal of basic science is to expand knowledge without any expectation of short-term practical application of that knowledge. The primary goal of applied research, however, is to solve practical problems.

Science uses two types of logical reasoning. Inductive reasoning uses particular results to produce general scientific principles. Deductive reasoning is a form of logical thinking that predicts results by applying general principles. The common thread throughout scientific research is using the scientific method, a step-based process that consists of making observations, defining a problem, posing hypotheses, testing these hypotheses, and drawing one or more conclusions. The testing uses proper controls. Scientists present their results in peer-reviewed scientific papers published in scientific journals. A scientific research paper consists of several well-defined sections: introduction, materials and methods, results, and, finally, a concluding discussion. Review papers summarize the conducted research in a particular field over a period of time.

1.2 Themes and Concepts of Biology

Biology is the science of life. All living organisms share several key properties such as order, sensitivity or response to stimuli, reproduction, growth and development, regulation, homeostasis, and energy processing. Living things are highly organized parts of a hierarchy that includes atoms, molecules, organelles, cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems. In turn, biologists group organisms as populations, communities, ecosystems, and the biosphere. The great diversity of life today evolved from less-diverse ancestral organisms over billions of years. We can use a phylogenetic tree to show evolutionary relationships among organisms.

Biology is very broad and includes many branches and subdisciplines. Examples include molecular biology, microbiology, neurobiology, zoology, and botany, among others.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 1.6 In the example below, the scientific method is used to solve an everyday problem. Match the scientific method steps (numbered items) with the process of solving the everyday problem (lettered items). Based on the results of the experiment, is the hypothesis correct? If it is incorrect, propose some alternative hypotheses.

1. a. There is something wrong with the   
Observation electrical outlet. b. If something is wrong with the   
2. Question outlet, my coffeemaker also won’t work when plugged into it.   
3.   
Hypothesis c. My toaster doesn’t toast my bread.   
(answer)   
4. d. I plug my coffee maker into the   
Prediction outlet.   
5. e. My coffeemaker works.   
Experiment   
6. Result f. Why doesn’t my toaster work?

2. Figure 1.7 Decide if each of the following is an example of inductive or deductive reasoning. 1. All flying birds and insects have wings. Birds and insects flap their wings as they move through the air. Therefore, wings enable flight. 2. Insects generally survive mild winters better than harsh ones. Therefore, insect pests will become more problematic if global temperatures increase. 3. Chromosomes, the carriers of DNA, separate into daughter cells during cell division. Therefore, each daughter cell will have the same chromosome set as the mother cell. 4. Animals as diverse as humans, insects, and wolves all exhibit social behavior. Therefore, social behavior must have an evolutionary advantage.

3. Figure 1.16 Which of the following statements is false?

a. Tissues exist within organs which exist within organ systems.   
b. Communities exist within populations which exist within ecosystems.   
c. Organelles exist within cells which exist within tissues.   
d. Communities exist within ecosystems which exist in the biosphere.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. The first forms of life on Earth were

a. plants   
b. microorganisms   
c. birds   
d. dinosaurs

5. A suggested and testable explanation for an event is called a

a. hypothesis b. variable c. theory d. control

6. Which of the following sciences is not considered a natural science?

a. biology   
b. astronomy   
c. physics   
d. computer science

7. The type of logical thinking that uses related observations to arrive at a general conclusion is called

a. deductive reasoning b. the scientific method c. hypothesis-based science d. inductive reasoning

8. The process of helps to ensure that a scientist’s research is original, significant, logical, and thorough.

a. publication b. public speaking c. peer review d. the scientific method

9. A person notices that her houseplants that are regularly exposed to music seem to grow more quickly than those in rooms with no music. As a result, she determines that plants grow better when exposed to music. This example most closely resembles which type of reasoning?

a. inductive reasoning   
b. deductive reasoning   
c. neither, because no hypothesis was made d. both inductive and deductive reasoning

10. The smallest unit of biological structure that meets the functional requirements of “living” is the

a. organ   
b. organelle   
c. cell   
d. macromolecule

11. Viruses are not considered living because they a. are not made of cells b. lack cell nuclei c. do not contain DNA or RNA d. cannot reproduce

12. The presence of a membrane-enclosed nucleus is a characteristic of

a. prokaryotic cells b. eukaryotic cells c. living organisms d. bacteria

13. A group of individuals of the same species living in the same area is called a(n)

a. family b. community c. population d. ecosystem

14. Which of the following sequences represents the hierarchy of biological organization from the most inclusive to the least complex level?

a. organelle, tissue, biosphere, ecosystem, population   
b. organ, organism, tissue, organelle, molecule   
c. organism, community, biosphere, molecule, tissue, organ   
d. biosphere, ecosystem, community, population, organism

15. Where in a phylogenetic tree would you expect to find the organism that had evolved most recently?

a. at the base b. within the branches c. at the nodes d. at the branch tips

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

16. Although the scientific method is used by most of the sciences, it can also be applied to everyday situations. Think about a problem that you may have at home, at school, or with your car, and apply the scientific method to solve it.   
17. Give an example of how applied science has had a direct effect on your daily life.   
18. Name two topics that are likely to be studied by biologists, and two areas of scientific study that would fall outside the realm of biology.   
19. Thinking about the topic of cancer, write a basic science question and an applied science question that a researcher interested in this topic might ask.   
20. Select two items that biologists agree are necessary in order to consider an organism “alive.” For each, give an example of a nonliving object that otherwise fits the definition of “alive.”   
21. Consider the levels of organization of the biological world, and place each of these items in order from smallest level of organization to most encompassing: skin cell, elephant, water molecule, planet Earth, tropical rainforest, hydrogen atom, wolf pack, liver.   
22. You go for a long walk on a hot day. Give an example of a way in which homeostasis keeps your body healthy.   
23. Using examples, explain how biology can be studied from a microscopic approach to a global approach.