13.4 Equilibrium Calculations

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Identify the changes in concentration or pressure that occur for chemical species in equilibrium systems • Calculate equilibrium concentrations or pressures and equilibrium constants, using various algebraic approaches

Having covered the essential concepts of chemical equilibria in the preceding sections of this chapter, this final section will demonstrate the more practical aspect of using these concepts and appropriate mathematical strategies to perform various equilibrium calculations. These types of computations are essential to many areas of science and technology—for example, in the formulation and dosing of pharmaceutical products. After a drug is ingested or injected, it is typically involved in several chemical equilibria that affect its ultimate concentration in the body system of interest. Knowledge of the quantitative aspects of these equilibria is required to compute a dosage amount that will solicit the desired therapeutic effect.

Many of the useful equilibrium calculations that will be demonstrated here require terms representing changes in reactant and product concentrations. These terms are derived from the stoichiometry of the reaction, as illustrated by decomposition of ammonia:

As shown earlier in this chapter, this equilibrium may be established within a sealed container that initially contains either  only, or a mixture of any two of the three chemical species involved in the equilibrium. Regardless of its initial composition, a reaction mixture will show the same relationships between changes in the concentrations of the three species involved, as dictated by the reaction stoichiometry (see also the related content on expressing reaction rates in the chapter on kinetics). For example, if the nitrogen concentration increases by an amount 

the corresponding changes in the other species concentrations are

where the negative sign indicates a decrease in concentration.

EXAMPLE 13.6

Determining Relative Changes in Concentration

Derive the missing terms representing concentration changes for each of the following reactions.

Solution

Check Your Learning

Complete the changes in concentrations for each of the following reactions:

(a)    
(b)   
(c)

Answer: (a) 2x, x, −2x;(b) x, −2x;(c) 4x, 7x, −4x, −6xor −4x, −7x, 4x, 6x

Calculation of an Equilibrium Constant

The equilibrium constant for a reaction is calculated from the equilibrium concentrations (or pressures) of its reactants and products. If these concentrations are known, the calculation simply involves their substitution into the K expression, as was illustrated by Example 13.2. A slightly more challenging example is provided next, in which the reaction stoichiometry is used to derive equilibrium concentrations from the information provided. The basic strategy of this computation is helpful for many types of equilibrium computations and relies on the use of terms for the reactant and product concentrations initialypresent, for how they changeas the reaction proceeds, and for what they are when the system reaches equilibrium. The acronym ICE is commonly used to refer to this mathematical approach, and the concentrations terms are usually gathered in a tabular format called an ICE table.

EXAMPLE 13.7

Calculation of an Equilibrium Constant

Iodine molecules react reversibly with iodide ions to produce triiodide ions.

If a solution with the concentrations of  and  both equal to  before reaction gives an equilibrium concentration of  of  , what is the equilibrium constant for the reaction?

Solution

To calculate the equilibrium constants, equilibrium concentrations are needed for all the reactants and products:

Provided are the initial concentrations of the reactants and the equilibrium concentration of the product. Use this information to derive terms for the equilibrium concentrations of the reactants, presenting all the information in an ICE table.

At equilibrium the concentration of  is  that

The ICE table may now be updated with numerical values for all its concentrations:

Finally, substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the  expression and solve:

Check Your Learning

Ethanol and acetic acid react and form water and ethyl acetate, the solvent responsible for the odor of some nail polish removers.

When 1 mol each of  and  are allowed to react in  of the solvent dioxane, equilibrium is established when  mol of each of the reactants remains. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the reaction. (Note: Water is a solute in this reaction.)

Calculation of a Missing Equilibrium Concentration

When the equilibrium constant and all but one equilibrium concentration are provided, the other equilibrium concentration(s) may be calculated. A computation of this sort is illustrated in the next example exercise.

EXAMPLE 13.8

Calculation of a Missing Equilibrium Concentration

Nitrogen oxides are air pollutants produced by the reaction of nitrogen and oxygen at high temperatures. At  , the value of the  for the reaction,  is  . Calculate the equilibrium concentration of  in air at 1 atm pressure and  . The equilibrium concentrations of  and  at this pressure and temperature are  and 0.0089 M, respectively.

Solution

Substitute the provided quantities into the equilibrium constant expression and solve for [NO]:

Thus [NO] is  at equilibrium under these conditions.

To confirm this result, it may be used along with the provided equilibrium concentrations to calculate a value for 

This result is consistent with the provided value for  within nominal uncertainty, differing by just 1 in the least significant digit’s place.

Check Your Learning

The equilibrium constant  for the reaction of nitrogen and hydrogen to produce ammonia at a certain temperature is  . Calculate the equilibrium concentration of ammonia if the equilibrium concentrations of nitrogen and hydrogen are  and  , respectively.

Answer: 

Calculation of Equilibrium Concentrations from Initial Concentrations

Perhaps the most challenging type of equilibrium calculation can be one in which equilibrium concentrations are derived from initial concentrations and an equilibrium constant. For these calculations, a four-step approach is typically useful:

1. Identify the direction in which the reaction will proceed to reach equilibrium.   
2. Develop an ICE table.   
3. Calculate the concentration changes and, subsequently, the equilibrium concentrations.   
4. Confirm the calculated equilibrium concentrations.

The last two example exercises of this chapter demonstrate the application of this strategy.

EXAMPLE 13.9

Calculation of Equilibrium Concentrations

Under certain conditions, the equilibrium constant  for the decomposition of  into  and  is 0.0211. What are the equilibrium concentrations of  ,  , and  in a mixture that initially contained only  at a concentration of 

Solution

Use the stepwise process described earlier.

Step 1.   
Determinethedirectionthereactionproce ds.

The balanced equation for the decomposition of  is

Because only the reactant is present initially  and the reaction will proceed to the right.

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium constant equation gives

Appendix B shows an equation of the form  can be rearranged to solve for x:

In this case,  ,  , and  . Substituting the appropriate values for a,  , and  yields:

The two roots of the quadratic are, therefore,

and

For this scenario, only the positive root is physically meaningful (concentrations are either zero or positive), and so  .

The equilibrium concentrations are

Step 4.   
Confirmthecalculatedequilibriumconcentrations.

Substitution into the expression for  (to check the calculation) gives

The equilibrium constant calculated from the equilibrium concentrations is equal to the value of  given in the problem (when rounded to the proper number of significant figures).

Check Your Learning

Acetic acid,  , reacts with ethanol,  , to form water and ethyl acetate,  .

The equilibrium constant for this reaction with dioxane as a solvent is 4.0. What are the equilibrium concentrations for a mixture that is initially  in  , 0.15  in  , 0.40 Min  , and  in 

Answer:

Check Your Learning

A 1.00-L flask is filled with 1.00 mole of  and 2.00 moles of  . The value of the equilibrium constant for the reaction of hydrogen and iodine reacting to form hydrogen iodide is 50.5 under the given conditions. What are the equilibrium concentrations of  , and HI in moles/L?

Answer: 

EXAMPLE 13.10

Calculation of Equilibrium Concentrations Using an Algebra-Simplifying Assumption

What are the concentrations at equilibrium of a 0.15  solution of HCN?

Solution

Using “  to represent the concentration of each product at equilibrium gives this ICE table.

Substitute the equilibrium concentration terms into the  expression

rearrange to the quadratic form and solve for 

Note in this case that the change in concentration is significantly less than the initial concentration (a consequence of the small  , and so the initial concentration experiences a negligible change:

This approximation allows for a more expedient mathematical approach to the calculation that avoids the need to solve for the roots of a quadratic equation:

The value of  calculated is, indeed, much less than the initial concentration

and so the approximation was justified. If this simplified approach were to yield a value for  that did not justify the approximation, the calculation would need to be repeated without making the approximation.

Check Your Learning

What are the equilibrium concentrations in a  solution?

Answer: 

Key Terms

equilibrium state of a reversible reaction in which the forward and reverse processes occur at equal rates   
equilibrium constant  value of the reaction quotient for a system at equilibrium; may be expressed using concentrations  or partial pressures    
heterogeneous equilibria equilibria in which reactants and products occupy two or more different phases   
homogeneous equilibria equilibria in which all reactants and products occupy the same phase   
law of mass action when a reversible reaction has attained equilibrium at a given temperature, the reaction quotient remains constant   
Le Châtelier’s principle an equilibrium subjected to stress will shift in a way to counter the stress and re-establish equilibrium   
reaction quotient (Q) mathematical function describing the relative amounts of reactants and products in a reaction mixture; may be expressed in terms of concentrations  or pressures    
reversible reaction chemical reaction that can proceed in both the forward and reverse directions under given conditions

Key Equations

 for the reaction  for the reaction    
 at equilibrium   
 at equilibrium   


Summary

13.1 Chemical Equilibria

A reversible reaction is at equilibrium when the forward and reverse processes occur at equal rates. Chemical equilibria are dynamic processes characterized by constant amounts of reactant and product species.

13.2 Equilibrium Constants

The composition of a reaction mixture may be represented by a mathematical function known as the reaction quotient,  . For a reaction at equilibrium, the composition is constant, and  is called the equilibrium constant, 

A homogeneous equilibrium is an equilibrium in which all components are in the same phase. A heterogeneous equilibrium is an equilibrium in which components are in two or more phases.

13.3 Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s Principle

Systems at equilibrium can be disturbed by changes to temperature, concentration, and, in some cases, volume and pressure. The system’s response to these disturbances is described by Le Châtelier’s principle: An equilibrium system subjected to a disturbance will shift in a way that counters the disturbance and re-establishes equilibrium. A catalyst will increase the rate of both the forward and reverse reactions of a reversible process, increasing the rate at which equilibrium is reached but not altering the equilibrium mixture’s composition (  does not change).

13.4 Equilibrium Calculations

Calculating values for equilibrium constants and/or equilibrium concentrations is of practical benefit to many applications. A mathematical strategy that uses initial concentrations, changes in concentrations, and equilibrium concentrations (and goes by the acronym ICE) is useful for several types of equilibrium calculations.

Exercises

13.1 Chemical Equilibria

1. What does it mean to describe a reaction as “reversible”?

2. When writing an equation, how is a reversible reaction distinguished from a nonreversible reaction?   
3. If a reaction is reversible, when can it be said to have reached equilibrium?   
4. Is a system at equilibrium if the rate constants of the forward and reverse reactions are equal?   
5. If the concentrations of products and reactants are equal, is the system at equilibrium?

13.2 Equilibrium Constants

6. Explain why there may be an infinite number of values for the reaction quotient of a reaction at a given temperature but there can be only one value for the equilibrium constant at that temperature.

7. Explain why an equilibrium between  and  would not be established if the container were not a closed vessel shown in Figure 13.4.

8. If you observe the following reaction at equilibrium, is it possible to tell whether the reaction started with pure  or with pure  ? 

9. Among the solubility rules previously discussed is the statement: All chlorides are soluble except  ,  ,  , and CuCl. (a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reaction represented by the equation  Is  , or  Explain your answer. (b) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reaction represented by the equation  Is  ,  Explain your answer.

10. Among the solubility rules previously discussed is the statement: Carbonates, phosphates, borates, and arsenates—except those of the ammonium ion and the alkali metals—are insoluble. (a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reaction represented by the equation  Is  ,  Explain your answer. (b) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reaction represented by the equation  Is  ,  Explain your answer.

11. Benzene is one of the compounds used as octane enhancers in unleaded gasoline. It is manufactured by the catalytic conversion of acetylene to benzene:  Which value of  would make this reaction most useful commercially?  ,  , or  . Explain your answer.

12. Show that the complete chemical equation, the total ionic equation, and the net ionic equation for the reaction represented by the equation  give the same expression for the reaction quotient.  is composed of the ions 

13. For a titration to be effective, the reaction must be rapid and the yield of the reaction must essentially be  . Is  ,  for a titration reaction?

14. For a precipitation reaction to be useful in a gravimetric analysis, the product of the reaction must be insoluble. Is  ,  for a useful precipitation reaction?

15. Write the mathematical expression for the reaction quotient,  for each of the following reactions: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (  (h 

16. Write the mathematical expression for the reaction quotient,  for each of the following reactions: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )  (g)  (h) 

17. The initial concentrations or pressures of reactants and products are given for each of the following systems. Calculate the reaction quotient and determine the direction in which each system will proceed to reach equilibrium. (a)  Kc = 17;  ,  ,  (b)   atm,  atm,  atm (c)  (g)  ；  ,  ,  (d)  Kp = 16.5;  atm,  atm,  atm (e)   (f )  Kp = 0.050;  atm,  atm

18. The initial concentrations or pressures of reactants and products are given for each of the following systems. Calculate the reaction quotient and determine the direction in which each system will proceed to reach equilibrium. (a)   (b)   atm (c)   (d)   atm;  atm,  atm,  atm (e)   m,  atm,  atm (f )  

19. The following reaction has  at  .

   
If a reaction vessel is filled with each gas to the partial pressures listed, in which direction will it shift to   
reach equilibrium?  atm,  atm, and  atm

20. Determine if the following system is at equilibrium. If not, in which direction will the system need to shift to reach equilibrium?   ,  and  .  for the reaction is 0.078.

21. Which of the systems described in Exercise 13.15 are homogeneous equilibria? Which are heterogeneous equilibria?   
22. Which of the systems described in Exercise 13.16 are homogeneous equilibria? Which are heterogeneous equilibria?

23. For which of the reactions in Exercise 13.15 does  (calculated using concentrations) equal  (calculated using pressures)?

24. For which of the reactions in Exercise 13.16 does  (calculated using concentrations) equal  (calculated using pressures)?

25. Convert the values of  to values of  or the values of  to values of  . (a)   at  (b)   at  (c)   (d)   at 

26. Convert the values of  to values of  or the values of  to values of  .

(a)   at  (b)   at  (c)  Kp = 5.09 × 10-44at 25 ℃C (d)   at 

27. What is the value of the equilibrium constant expression for the change  at  (See Appendix E.)

8. Write the expression of the reaction quotient for the ionization of HOCN in water.

29. Write the reaction quotient expression for the ionization of  in wate

30. What is the approximate value of the equilibrium constant  for the change  at  . (The equilibrium vapor pressure for this substance is 570 torr at  )

13.3 Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s Principle

31. The following equation represents a reversible decomposition:  Under what conditions will decomposition in a closed container proceed to completion so that no  remains?

32. Explain how to recognize the conditions under which changes in volume will affect gas-phase systems at equilibrium.

33. What property of a reaction can we use to predict the effect of a change in temperature on the value of an equilibrium constant?

34. The following reaction occurs when a burner on a gas stove is lit:  Is an equilibrium among  ,  ,  , and  established under these conditions? Explain your answer.

35. A necessary step in the manufacture of sulfuric acid is the formation of sulfur trioxide,  , from sulfur dioxide,  , and oxygen,  , shown here. At high temperatures, the rate of formation of  is higher, bu the equilibrium amount (concentration or partial pressure) of  is lower than it would be at lower temperatures.  (a) Does the equilibrium constant for the reaction increase, decrease, or remain about the same as the temperature increases? (b) Is the reaction endothermic or exothermic?

36. Suggest four ways in which the concentration of hydrazine,  , could be increased in an equilibrium described by the following equation:  

37. Suggest four ways in which the concentration of  could be increased in an equilibrium described by the following equation:  

38. How will an increase in temperature affect each of the following equilibria? How will a decrease in the volume of the reaction vessel affect each? (a)  (b) (c) (d)

39. How will an increase in temperature affect each of the following equilibria? How will a decrease in the volume of the reaction vessel affect each? (a)  (b) (c) (d)

40. Methanol can be prepared from carbon monoxide and hydrogen at high temperature and pressure in the presence of a suitable catalyst. (a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant  for the reversible reaction   (b) What will happen to the concentrations of  , CO, and  at equilibrium if more  is added? (c) What will happen to the concentrations of  , CO, and  at equilibrium if CO is removed? (d) What will happen to the concentrations of  , CO, and  at equilibrium if  is added? (e) What will happen to the concentrations of  , CO, and  at equilibrium if the temperature of the system is increased? (f) What will happen to the concentrations of  , CO, and  at equilibrium if more catalyst is added?

41. Nitrogen and oxygen react at high temperatures. (a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant  for the reversible reaction   (b) What will happen to the concentrations of  ,  , and NO at equilibrium if more  is added? (c) What will happen to the concentrations of  ,  , and NO at equilibrium if  is removed? (d) What will happen to the concentrations of  ,  , and NO at equilibrium if NO is added? (e) What will happen to the concentrations of  ,  , and NO at equilibrium if the volume of the reaction vessel is decreased? (f) What will happen to the concentrations of  ,  , and NO at equilibrium if the temperature of the system is increased? (g) What will happen to the concentrations of  , and NO at equilibrium if a catalyst is added?

42. Water gas, a mixture of  and CO, is an important industrial fuel produced by the reaction of steam with red hot coke, essentially pure carbon. (a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reversible reaction   (b) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if more C is added? (c) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if  is removed? (d) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if CO is added? (e) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if the temperature of the system is increased?

43. Pure iron metal can be produced by the reduction of iron(III) oxide with hydrogen gas. (a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant  for the reversible reaction   (b) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if more Fe is added? (c) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if  is removed? (d) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if  is added? (e) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if the volume of the reaction vessel is decreased? (f) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if the temperature of the system is increased?

44. Ammonia is a weak base that reacts with water according to this equation:  Will any of the following increase the percent of ammonia that is converted to the ammonium ion in water? (a) Addition of NaOH (b) Addition of HCl (c) Addition of 

45. Acetic acid is a weak acid that reacts with water according to this equation:  Will any of the following increase the percent of acetic acid that reacts and produces  ion? (a) Addition of HCl (b) Addition of NaOH (c) Addition of 

46. Suggest two ways in which the equilibrium concentration of  can be reduced in a solution of  ,  ,  , and  in contact with solid AgCl.  

47. How can the pressure of water vapor be increased in the following equilibrium?

48. A solution is saturated with silver sulfate and contains excess solid silver sulfate:

   
A small amount of solid silver sulfate containing a radioactive isotope of silver is added to this solution. Within a few minutes, a portion of the solution phase is sampled and tests positive for radioactive  ions. Explain this observation.

49. When equal molar amounts of HCl and HOCl are dissolved separately in equal amounts of water, the solution of HCl freezes at a lower temperature. Which compound has the larger equilibrium constant for acid ionization? (a) HCl (b)  (c) HOCl (d) 

13.4 Equilibrium Calculations

50. A reaction is represented by this equation: 

(a) Write the mathematical expression for the equilibrium constant.   
(b) Using concentrations  , identify two sets of concentrations that describe a mixture of A, B, and C at equilibrium.

51. A reaction is represented by this equation: 

(a) Write the mathematical expression for the equilibrium constant.   
(b) Using concentrations of  , identify two sets of concentrations that describe a mixture of W, X, and Y at equilibrium.

52. What is the value of the equilibrium constant at  for the formation of  according to the following equation?  An equilibrium mixture of  , and  at  was found to contain  ,  , and  .

53. Hydrogen is prepared commercially by the reaction of methane and water vapor at elevated temperatures.  What is the equilibrium constant for the reaction if a mixture at equilibrium contains gases with the following concentrations:  ,  ;  ,  CO,  ;  , at a temperature of 

54. A 0.72-mol sample of  is put into a 1.00-L vessel and heated. At equilibrium, the vessel contains 0.40 mol of  and  of  . Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant for the decomposition of  to  and  at this temperature.

55. At 1 atm and  ,  with an initial concentration of  is  decomposed into NO and  . Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant for the reaction. 

56. Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant  for the reaction  from these equilibrium pressures: NO, 0.050 atm;  , 0.30 atm; NOCl, 1.2 atm.

57. When heated, iodine vapor dissociates according to this equation:  At 1274 K, a sample exhibits a partial pressure of  of 0.1122 atm and a partial pressure due to I atoms of 0.1378 atm. Determine the value of the equilibrium constant,  , for the decomposition at  .

58. A sample of ammonium chloride was heated in a closed container.  At equilibrium, the pressure of  was found to be 1.75 atm. What is the value of the equilibrium constant  for the decomposition at this temperature?   
59. At a temperature of  , the vapor pressure of water is 0.196 atm. What is the value of the equilibrium constant  for the vaporization equilibrium at  

60. Complete the following partial ICE tables. (a) change  (b) 4NH3(g) +302(g） 2N2(g)+ 6HO(g) change +x (c) change  (d) CH4(g)+ H2O(g) = CO(g)+ 3H2(g) change +x (e)  (f )  change 

61. Complete the following partial ICE tables. (a) change  (b)  change  (c)  change  (d) change  (e)  (f ) 

62. Why are there no changes specified for Ni in Exercise  , part (f)? What property of Ni does change? 63. Why are there no changes specified for  in Exercise 13.61, part (e)? What property of  does change?

64. Analysis of the gases in a sealed reaction vessel containing  ,  , and  at equilibrium at  established the concentration of  to be  and the concentration of  to be  .   Calculate the equilibrium molar concentration of  .

65. Calculate the number of moles of HI that are at equilibrium with  of  and  of  in a 5.00−L flask at  .

 

66. What is the pressure of BrCl in an equilibrium mixture of  ,  , and  if the pressure of  in the mixture is 0.115 atm and the pressure of  in the mixture is 0.450 atm?

 Kp = 4.7 × 10-2

67. What is the pressure of  in a mixture at equilibrium that contains 0.50 atm  , 2.0 atm of  , and 1.0 atm of CO at 

 

68. Cobalt metal can be prepared by reducing cobalt(II) oxide with carbon monoxide.

What concentration of CO remains in an equilibrium mixture with 

9. Carbon reacts with water vapor at elevated temperatures.

 

Assuming a reaction mixture initially contains only reactants, what is the concentration of CO in an equilibrium mixture with  at 

70. Sodium sulfate 10−hydrate,  , dehydrates according to the equation   at  What is the pressure of water vapor at equilibrium with a mixture of  and  D

71. Calcium chloride 6−hydrate,  , dehydrates according to the equation   at  What is the pressure of water vapor at equilibrium with a mixture of  and  at 

72. A student solved the following problem and found the equilibrium concentrations to be   and  How could this student check the work without reworking the problem? The problem was: For the following reaction at  :  

73. A student solved the following problem and found  at equilibrium. How could this student recognize that the answer was wrong without reworking the problem? The problem was: What is the equilibrium concentration of  in a mixture formed from a sample of  with a concentration of 0.10 M?  

74. Assume that the change in concentration of  is small enough to be neglected in the following problem. (a) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of both species in  of a solution prepared from 0.129 mol of  with chloroform as the solvent.   in chloroform (b) Confirm that the change is small enough to be neglected.

75. Assume that the change in concentration of  is small enough to be neglected in the following problem. (a) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of all species in an equilibrium mixture that results from the decomposition of  with an initial concentration of  .  Kc = 2.2 × 10-10 (b) Confirm that th gh b neglected

76. Assume that the change in pressure of  is small enough to be neglected in the following problem. (a) Calculate the equilibrium pressures of all species in an equilibrium mixture that results from the decomposition of  with an initial pressure of 0.824 atm.  Kp = 2.2 × 10-6 (b) Confirm that the change is small enough to be neglected.

77. What are all concentrations after a mixture that contains  and  Mcomes to equilibrium at 

 

78. What are the concentrations of  , and  in an equilibrium mixture produced by the decomposition of a sample of pure  with 

 

79. Calculate the number of grams of HI that are at equilibrium with  of  and  of iodine at 448  .

80. Butane exists as two isomers,  −butane and isobutane.

 at    
What is the pressure of isobutane in a container of the two isomers at equilibrium with a total pressure of   
1.22 atm?

81. What is the minimum mass of  required to establish equilibrium at a certain temperature in a  container if the equilibrium constant  is 0.50 for the decomposition reaction of  at that temperature? 

82. The equilibrium constant  for this reaction is 1.60 at  :  Calculate the number of moles of each component in the final equilibrium mixture obtained from adding  of  ,  of   of  , and  of CO to a 5.00-L container at  .

83. In a  vessel, the following equilibrium partial pressures are measured:  , 190 torr;  , 317 torr;  ,  torr.  (a) How will the partial pressures of  ,  , and  change if  is removed from the system? Will they increase, decrease, or remain the same? (b) Hydrogen is removed from the vessel until the partial pressure of nitrogen, at equilibrium, is 250 torr. Calculate the partial pressures of the other substances under the new conditions.

84. The equilibrium constant  for this reaction is 5.0 at a given temperature.  (a) On analysis, an equilibrium mixture of the substances present at the given temperature was found to contain  of CO,  of water vapor, and  of  in a liter. How many moles of  were there in the equilibrium mixture? (b) Maintaining the same temperature, additional  was added to the system, and some water vapor was removed by drying. A new equilibrium mixture was thereby established containing  of CO, 0.30 mol of water vapor, and  of  in a liter. How many moles of  were in the new equilibrium mixture? Compare this with the quantity in part (a), and discuss whether the second value is reasonable. Explain how it is possible for the water vapor concentration to be the same in the two equilibrium solutions even though some vapor was removed before the second equilibrium was established.

85. Antimony pentachloride decomposes according to this equation:  An equilibrium mixture in a  flask at  contains  of  ,  of  , and  of  . How many grams of each will be found if the mixture is transferred into a 2.00-L flask at the same temperature?

86. Consider the equilibrium

   
(a) What is the expression for the equilibrium constant  of the reaction?   
(b) How must the concentration of  change to reach equilibrium if the reaction quotient is less than   
the equilibrium constant?   
(c) If the reaction were at equilibrium, how would an increase in the volume of the reaction vessel affect   
the pressure of  ?   
(d) If the change in the pressure of  is 28 torr as a mixture of the four gases reaches equilibrium, how   
much will the pressure of  change?

87. The binding of oxygen by hemoglobin (Hb), giving oxyhemoglobin  ), is partially regulated by the concentration of  and dissolved  in the blood. Although the equilibrium is complicated, it can be summarized as  (a) Write the equilibrium constant expression for this reaction. (b) Explain why the production of lactic acid and  in a muscle during exertion stimulates release of  from the oxyhemoglobin in the blood passing through the muscle.

88. Liquid  is dark blue at low temperatures, but the color fades and becomes greenish at higher temperatures as the compound decomposes to NO and  . At  , a value of  has been established for this decomposition. If 0.236 moles of  are placed in a 1.52-L vessel at  , calculate the equilibrium partial pressures of  ,  , and  .

89. A 1.00-L vessel at  contains the following equilibrium concentrations:  ; and  ,  . How many moles of hydrogen must be removed from the vessel to increase the concentration of nitrogen to 1.1 M? The equilibrium reaction is