9.6 Non-Ideal Gas Behavior

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe the physical factors that lead to deviations from ideal gas behavior   
• Explain how these factors are represented in the van der Waals equation   
• Define compressibility (Z) and describe how its variation with pressure reflects non-ideal behavior   
• Quantify non-ideal behavior by comparing computations of gas properties using the ideal gas law and the van der Waals equation

Thus far, the ideal gas law,  , has been applied to a variety of different types of problems, ranging from reaction stoichiometry and empirical and molecular formula problems to determining the density and molar mass of a gas. As mentioned in the previous modules of this chapter, however, the behavior of a gas is often non-ideal, meaning that the observed relationships between its pressure, volume, and temperature are not accurately described by the gas laws. In this section, the reasons for these deviations from ideal gas behavior are considered.

One way in which the accuracy of  can be judged is by comparing the actual volume of 1 mole of gas (its molar volume,  to the molar volume of an ideal gas at the same temperature and pressure. This ratio is called the compressibility factor  with:

Ideal gas behavior is therefore indicated when this ratio is equal to 1, and any deviation from 1 is an indication of non-ideal behavior. Figure 9.35 shows plots of Z over a large pressure range for several common gases.

As is apparent from Figure 9.35, the ideal gas law does not describe gas behavior well at relatively high pressures. To determine why this is, consider the differences between real gas properties and what is expected of a hypothetical ideal gas.

Particles of a hypothetical ideal gas have no significant volume and do not attract or repel each other. In general, real gases approximate this behavior at relatively low pressures and high temperatures. However, at high pressures, the molecules of a gas are crowded closer together, and the amount of empty space between the molecules is reduced. At these higher pressures, the volume of the gas molecules themselves becomes appreciable relative to the total volume occupied by the gas. The gas therefore becomes less compressible at these high pressures, and although its volume continues to decrease with increasing pressure, this decrease is not proportionalas predicted by Boyle’s law.

At relatively low pressures, gas molecules have practically no attraction for one another because they are (on average) so far apart, and they behave almost like particles of an ideal gas. At higher pressures, however, the force of attraction is also no longer insignificant. This force pulls the molecules a little closer together, slightly decreasing the pressure (if the volume is constant) or decreasing the volume (at constant pressure) (Figure 9.36). This change is more pronounced at low temperatures because the molecules have lower KE relative to the attractive forces, and so they are less effective in overcoming these attractions after colliding with one another.

There are several different equations that better approximate gas behavior than does the ideal gas law. The first, and simplest, of these was developed by the Dutch scientist Johannes van der Waals in 1879. The van der Waals equation improves upon the ideal gas law by adding two terms: one to account for the volume of the gas molecules and another for the attractive forces between them.

The constant acorresponds to the strength of the attraction between molecules of a particular gas, and the constant  corresponds to the size of the molecules of a particular gas. The “correction” to the pressure term in the ideal gas law i s and the “correction” to the volume is nb. Note that when Vis relatively large and nis relatively small, both of these correction terms become negligible, and the van der Waals equation reduces to the ideal gas law,  . Such a condition corresponds to a gas in which a relatively low number of molecules is occupying a relatively large volume, that is, a gas at a relatively low pressure. Experimental values for the van der Waals constants of some common gases are given in Table 9.3.

At low pressures, the correction for intermolecular attraction, a, is more important than the one for molecular volume,  . At high pressures and small volumes, the correction for the volume of the molecules becomes important because the molecules themselves are incompressible and constitute an appreciable fraction of the total volume. At some intermediate pressure, the two corrections have opposing influences and the gas appears to follow the relationship given by  over a small range of pressures. This behavior is reflected by the “dips” in several of the compressibility curves shown in Figure 9.35. The attractive force between molecules initially makes the gas more compressible than an ideal gas, as pressure is raised (Z decreases with increasing  ). At very high pressures, the gas becomes less compressible (Z increases with  ), as the gas molecules begin to occupy an increasingly significant fraction of the total gas volume.

Strictly speaking, the ideal gas equation functions well when intermolecular attractions between gas molecules are negligible and the gas molecules themselves do not occupy an appreciable part of the whole volume. These criteria are satisfied under conditions of lowpres ureandhightemperature. Under such conditions, the gas is said to behave ideally, and deviations from the gas laws are small enough that they may be disregarded—this is, however, very often not the case.

EXAMPLE 9.24

Comparison of Ideal Gas Law and van der Waals Equation

A 4.25-L flask contains  at  . Calculate the pressure of this sample of 

(a) from the ideal gas law (b) from the van der Waals equation (c) Explain the reason(s) for the difference.

Solution

(a) From the ideal gas law:

(b) From the van der Waals equation:

This finally yields  atm.

(c) This is not very different from the value from the ideal gas law because the pressure is not very high and the temperature is not very low. The value is somewhat different because  molecules do have some volume and attractions between molecules, and the ideal gas law assumes they do not have volume or attractions.

Check your Learning

A 560-mL flask contains  at  . Calculate the pressure of  :

(a) from the ideal gas law (b) from the van der Waals equation (c) Explain the reason(s) for the difference.

Answer:

(a) 46.562 atm; (b) 46.594 atm; (c) The van der Waals equation takes into account the volume of the gas molecules themselves as well as intermolecular attractions.

Key Terms

absolute zero temperature at which the volume of a gas would be zero according to Charles’s law.   
Amontons’s law (also, Gay-Lussac’s law) pressure of a given number of moles of gas is directly proportional to its kelvin temperature when the volume is held constant   
atmosphere (atm) unit of pressure; 1 atm  101,325 Pa   
Avogadro’s law volume of a gas at constant temperature and pressure is proportional to the number of gas molecules   
bar (bar or b) unit of pressure;    
barometer device used to measure atmospheric pressure   
Boyle’s law volume of a given number of moles of gas held at constant temperature is inversely proportional to the pressure under which it is measured   
Charles’s law volume of a given number of moles of gas is directly proportional to its kelvin temperature when the pressure is held constant   
compressibility factor (Z) ratio of the experimentally measured molar volume for a gas to its molar volume as computed from the ideal gas equation   
Dalton’s law of partial pressures total pressure of a mixture of ideal gases is equal to the sum of the partial pressures of the component gases   
diffusion movement of an atom or molecule from a region of relatively high concentration to one of relatively low concentration (discussed in this chapter with regard to gaseous species, but applicable to species in any phase)   
effusion transfer of gaseous atoms or molecules from a container to a vacuum through very small openings   
Graham’s law of effusion rates of diffusion and effusion of gases are inversely proportional to the square roots of their molecular masses   
hydrostatic pressure pressure exerted by a fluid due to gravity   
ideal gas hypothetical gas whose physical properties are perfectly described by the gas laws   
ideal gas constant  constant derived from the ideal gas equation  atm  or    
ideal gas law relation between the pressure, volume, amount, and temperature of a gas under conditions derived by combination of the simple gas laws   
kinetic molecular theory theory based on simple principles and assumptions that effectively explains ideal gas behavior   
manometer device used to measure the pressure of a gas trapped in a container   
mean free path average distance a molecule travels between collisions   
mole fraction  concentration unit defined as the ratio of the molar amount of a mixture component to the total number of moles of all mixture components   
partial pressure pressure exerted by an individual gas in a mixture   
pascal (Pa) SI unit of pressure;    
pounds per square inch (psi) unit of pressure common in the US   
pressure force exerted per unit area   
rate of diffusion amount of gas diffusing through a given area over a given time   
root mean square speed  measure of average speed for a group of particles calculated as the square root of the average squared speed   
standard conditions of temperature and pressure (STP) 273.15 K  and 1 atm    
standard molar volume volume of 1 mole of gas at STP, approximately  for gases behaving ideally   
torr unit of pressure;  atm   
van der Waals equation modified version of the ideal gas equation containing additional terms to account for non-ideal gas behavior   
vapor pressure of water pressure exerted by water vapor in equilibrium with liquid water in a closed container at a specific temperature

Key Equations

 amount of gas passing through an area   
rate of diffusion  unit of time   
rate of effusion of    
rate of effusion of 3 3 2 1 十 十 2 n 4   
urms   
KEavg RT 3RT   
urms M molar volume of gas at same  and    
Z: molar volume of ideal gas at same  a measured   


Summary

9.1 Gas Pressure

Gases exert pressure, which is force per unit area. The pressure of a gas may be expressed in the SI unit of pascal or kilopascal, as well as in many other units including torr, atmosphere, and bar. Atmospheric pressure is measured using a barometer; other gas pressures can be measured using one of several types of manometers.

9.2 Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law

The behavior of gases can be described by several laws based on experimental observations of their properties. The pressure of a given amount of gas is directly proportional to its absolute temperature, provided that the volume does not change (Amontons’s law). The volume of a given gas sample is directly proportional to its absolute temperature at constant pressure (Charles’s law). The volume of a given amount of gas is inversely proportional to its pressure when temperature is held constant (Boyle’s law). Under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, equal volumes of all gases contain the same number of molecules (Avogadro’s law).

The equations describing these laws are special cases of the ideal gas law,  , where  is the pressure of the gas,  is its volume,  is the number of moles of the gas,  is its kelvin temperature, and  is the ideal (universal) gas constant.

9.3 Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions

The ideal gas law can be used to derive a number of convenient equations relating directly measured

quantities to properties of interest for gaseous substances and mixtures. Appropriate rearrangement of the ideal gas equation may be made to permit the calculation of gas densities and molar masses. Dalton’s law of partial pressures may be used to relate measured gas pressures for gaseous mixtures to their compositions. Avogadro’s law may be used in stoichiometric computations for chemical reactions involving gaseous reactants or products.

9.4 Effusion and Diffusion of Gases

Gaseous atoms and molecules move freely and randomly through space. Diffusion is the process whereby gaseous atoms and molecules are transferred from regions of relatively high concentration to regions of relatively low concentration. Effusion is a similar process in which gaseous species pass from a container to a vacuum through very small orifices. The rates of effusion of gases are inversely proportional to the square roots of their densities or to the square roots of their atoms/molecules’ masses (Graham’s law).

9.5 The Kinetic-Molecular Theory

The kinetic molecular theory is a simple but very effective model that effectively explains ideal gas behavior. The theory assumes that gases consist of widely separated molecules of negligible volume that are in constant motion, colliding elastically with one another and the walls of their container with average speeds determined by their absolute temperatures. The individual molecules of a gas exhibit a range of speeds, the distribution of these speeds being dependent on the temperature of the gas and the mass of its molecules.

9.6 Non-Ideal Gas Behavior

Gas molecules possess a finite volume and experience forces of attraction for one another. Consequently, gas behavior is not necessarily described well by the ideal gas law. Under conditions of low pressure and high temperature, these factors are negligible, the ideal gas equation is an accurate description of gas behavior, and the gas is said to exhibit ideal behavior. However, at lower temperatures and higher pressures, corrections for molecular volume and molecular attractions are required to account for finite molecular size and attractive forces. The van der Waals equation is a modified version of the ideal gas law that can be used to account for the non-ideal behavior of gases under these conditions.

Exercises

9.1 Gas Pressure

1. Why are sharp knives more effective than dull knives? (Hint: Think about the definition of pressure.)   
2. Why do some small bridges have weight limits that depend on how many wheels or axles the crossing vehicle has?   
3. Why should you roll or belly-crawl rather than walk across a thinly-frozen pond?   
4. A typical barometric pressure in Redding, California, is about  . Calculate this pressure in atm and kPa.   
5. A typical barometric pressure in Denver, Colorado, is 615 mm Hg. What is this pressure in atmospheres and kilopascals?   
6. A typical barometric pressure in Kansas City is 740 torr. What is this pressure in atmospheres, in millimeters of mercury, and in kilopascals?   
7. Canadian tire pressure gauges are marked in units of kilopascals. What reading on such a gauge corresponds to 32 psi?   
8. During the Viking landings on Mars, the atmospheric pressure was determined to be on the average about 6.50 millibars  atm). What is that pressure in torr and kPa?   
9. The pressure of the atmosphere on the surface of the planet Venus is about 88.8 atm. Compare that pressure in psi to the normal pressure on earth at sea level in psi.   
10. A medical laboratory catalog describes the pressure in a cylinder of a gas as 14.82 MPa. What is the pressure of this gas in atmospheres and torr?   
11. Consider this scenario and answer the following questions: On a mid-August day in the northeastern United States, the following information appeared in the local newspaper: atmospheric pressure at sea level 29.97 in. Hg, 1013.9 mbar. (a) What was the pressure in kPa? (b) The pressure near the seacoast in the northeastern United States is usually reported near 30.0 in. Hg. During a hurricane, the pressure may fall to near 28.0 in. Hg. Calculate the drop in pressure in torr.

2. Why is it necessary to use a nonvolatile liquid in a barometer or manometer?

13. The pressure of a sample of gas is measured at sea level with a closed-end manometer. The liquid in the manometer is mercury. Determine the pressure of the gas in:

(a) torr (b) Pa (c) bar

14. The pressure of a sample of gas is measured with an open-end manometer, partially shown to the right. The liquid in the manometer is mercury. Assuming atmospheric pressure is 29.92 in. Hg, determine the pressure of the gas in:

(a) torr (b) Pa (c) bar

15. The pressure of a sample of gas is measured at sea level with an open-end mercury manometer. Assuming atmospheric pressure is  , determine the pressure of the gas in:

(a) mm Hg (b) atm (c) kPa

16. The pressure of a sample of gas is measured at sea level with an open-end mercury manometer. Assuming atmospheric pressure is  , determine the pressure of the gas in:

(a) mm Hg (b) atm (c) kPa

17. How would the use of a volatile liquid affect the measurement of a gas using open-ended manometers vs. closed-end manometers?

9.2 Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law

18. Sometimes leaving a bicycle in the sun on a hot day will cause a blowout. Why?   
19. Explain how the volume of the bubbles exhausted by a scuba diver (Figure 9.16) change as they rise to the surface, assuming that they remain intact.   
20. One way to state Boyle’s law is “All other things being equal, the pressure of a gas is inversely proportional to its volume.” (a) What is the meaning of the term “inversely proportional?” (b) What are the “other things” that must be equal?   
21. An alternate way to state Avogadro’s law is “All other things being equal, the number of molecules in a gas is directly proportional to the volume of the gas.” (a) What is the meaning of the term “directly proportional?” (b) What are the “other things” that must be equal?   
22. How would the graph in Figure 9.12 change if the number of moles of gas in the sample used to determine the curve were doubled?   
23. How would the graph in Figure 9.13 change if the number of moles of gas in the sample used to determine the curve were doubled?   
24. In addition to the data found in Figure 9.13, what other information do we need to find the mass of the sample of air used to determine the graph?   
25. Determine the volume of  of  gas at  and 1 atm, using Figure 9.12.   
26. Determine the pressure of the gas in the syringe shown in Figure 9.13 when its volume is  , using: (a) the appropriate graph (b) Boyle’s law   
27. A spray can is used until it is empty except for the propellant gas, which has a pressure of 1344 torr at 23  . If the can is thrown into a fire  , what will be the pressure in the hot can?   
28. What is the temperature of an 11.2-L sample of carbon monoxide, CO, at 744 torr if it occupies  at 55  and 744 torr?   
29. A 2.50-L volume of hydrogen measured at  is warmed to  . Calculate the volume of the gas at the higher temperature, assuming no change in pressure.   
30. A balloon inflated with three breaths of air has a volume of  . At the same temperature and pressure, what is the volume of the balloon if five more same-sized breaths are added to the balloon?

31. A weather balloon contains 8.80 moles of helium at a pressure of 0.992 atm and a temperature of  at ground level. What is the volume of the balloon under these conditions?

32. The volume of an automobile air bag was  when inflated at  with  of nitrogen gas. What was the pressure in the bag in kPa?

33. How many moles of gaseous boron trifluoride,  , are contained in a 4.3410-L bulb at 788.0 K if the pressure is 1.220 atm? How many grams of 

34. Iodine,  , is a solid at room temperature but sublimes (converts from a solid into a gas) when warmed. What is the temperature in a  bulb that contains  of  vapor at a pressure of 0.462 atm?

35. How many grams of gas are present in each of the following cases? (a)  of  at 307 torr and  (b)  of  , at  and  (c)  of Ar at 0.23 torr and 

36. A high altitude balloon is filled with  of hydrogen at a temperature of  and a pressure of 745 torr. What is the volume of the balloon at a height of  , where the temperature is  and the pressure is 63.1 torr?

37. A cylinder of medical oxygen has a volume of  , and contains  at a pressure of 151 atm and a temperature of  . What volume of  does this correspond to at normal body conditions, that is, 1 atm and 

38. A large scuba tank (Figure 9.16) with a volume of  is rated for a pressure of 220 bar. The tank is filled at  and contains enough air to supply  of air to a diver at a pressure of 2.37 atm (a depth of 45 feet). Was the tank filled to capacity at 

39. A  cylinder containing  of butane,  , was opened to the atmosphere. Calculate the mass of the gas remaining in the cylinder if it were opened and the gas escaped until the pressure in the cylinder was equal to the atmospheric pressure, 0.983 atm, and a temperature of  .

40. While resting, the average  human male consumes  of pure  per hour at  and  . How many moles of  are consumed by a  man while resting for 

41. For a given amount of gas showing ideal behavior, draw labeled graphs of: (a) the variation of  with  (b) the variation of  with  (c) the variation of  with  (d) the variation of  with 

42. A liter of methane gas,  , at STP contains more atoms of hydrogen than does a liter of pure hydrogen gas,  , at STP. Using Avogadro’s law as a starting point, explain why.

43. The effect of chlorofluorocarbons (such as  ) on the depletion of the ozone layer is well known. The use of substitutes, such as  , for the chlorofluorocarbons, has largely corrected the problem. Calculate the volume occupied by  of each of these compounds at STP: (a)  (b) 

44. As  of the radioactive element radium decays over 1 year, it produces  alpha particles (helium nuclei). Each alpha particle becomes an atom of helium gas. What is the pressure in pascal of the helium gas produced if it occupies a volume of  at a temperature of 

45. A balloon with a volume of  at  and 0.981 atm is released and just barely clears the top of Mount Crumpit in British Columbia. If the final volume of the balloon is  at a temperature of 5.24  , what is the pressure experienced by the balloon as it clears Mount Crumpet?

46. If the temperature of a fixed amount of a gas is doubled at constant volume, what happens to the pressure?   
47. If the volume of a fixed amount of a gas is tripled at constant temperature, what happens to the pressure?

9.3 Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions

48. What is the density of laughing gas, dinitrogen monoxide,  , at a temperature of 325 K and a pressure of 

49. Calculate the density of Freon 12,  , at  and 0.954 atm.   
50. Which is denser at the same temperature and pressure, dry air or air saturated with water vapor? Explain.   
51. A cylinder of  used in breathing by patients with emphysema has a volume of  at a pressure of 10.0 atm. If the temperature of the cylinder is  , what mass of oxygen is in the cylinder?   
52. What is the molar mass of a gas if  of the gas occupies a volume of  at a temperature  and a pressure of 307 torr?   
53. What is the molar mass of a gas if 0.281 g of the gas occupies a volume of  at a temperature  and a pressure of 777 torr?   
54. How could you show experimentally that the molecular formula of propene is  , not  ?   
55. The density of a certain gaseous fluoride of phosphorus is  at STP. Calculate the molar mass of this fluoride and determine its molecular formula.   
56. Consider this question: What is the molecular formula of a compound that contains  C,  N, and  if  of the compound occupies  with a pressure of  at  (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question. (b) Answer the question.   
57. A  cylinder of a gas used for calibration of blood gas analyzers in medical laboratories contains 350  ,  , and  . At 25 degrees C, what is the pressure in the cylinder in atmospheres?   
58. A cylinder of a gas mixture used for calibration of blood gas analyzers in medical laboratories contains   ,  , and the remainder  at a total pressure of 146 atm. What is the partial pressure of each component of this gas? (The percentages given indicate the percent of the total pressure that is due to each component.)   
59. A sample of gas isolated from unrefined petroleum contains   ,  , and  at a total pressure of  . What is the partial pressure of each component of this gas? (The percentages given indicate the percent of the total pressure that is due to each component.)   
60. A mixture of  of  ,  of  , and  of Ar is stored in a closed container at STP. Find the volume of the container, assuming that the gases exhibit ideal behavior.   
61. Most mixtures of hydrogen gas with oxygen gas are explosive. However, a mixture that contains less than  is not. If enough  is added to a cylinder of  at 33.2 atm to bring the total pressure to  , is the mixture explosive?   
62. A commercial mercury vapor analyzer can detect, in air, concentrations of gaseous  atoms (which are poisonous) as low as  of air. At this concentration, what is the partial pressure of gaseous mercury if the atmospheric pressure is 733 torr at    
63. A sample of carbon monoxide was collected over water at a total pressure of 756 torr and a temperature of  What is the pressure of the carbon monoxide? (See Table 9.2 for the vapor pressure of water.)   
64. In an experiment in a general chemistry laboratory, a student collected a sample of a gas over water. The volume of the gas was  at a pressure of 753 torr and a temperature of  . The mass of the gas was  . What was the molar mass of the gas?   
65. Joseph Priestley first prepared pure oxygen by heating mercuric oxide, HgO:  (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of  at  and 0.975 atm is produced by the decomposition of  of  (b) Answer the question.   
66. Cavendish prepared hydrogen in 1766 by the novel method of passing steam through a red-hot gun barrel:  (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of  at a pressure of 745 torr and a temperature of  can be prepared from the reaction of  of  (b) Answer the question.   
67. The chlorofluorocarbon  can be recycled into a different compound by reaction with hydrogen to produce  , a compound useful in chemical manufacturing:  (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of hydrogen at 225 atm and  would be required to react with 1 ton  of  ? (b) Answer the question.   
68. Automobile air bags are inflated with nitrogen gas, which is formed by the decomposition of solid sodium azide  . The other product is sodium metal. Calculate the volume of nitrogen gas at  and 756 torr formed by the decomposition of  of sodium azide.   
69. Lime, CaO, is produced by heating calcium carbonate,  ; carbon dioxide is the other product. (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of carbon dioxide at  and 0.966 atm is produced by the decomposition of 1 ton  of calcium carbonate? (b) Answer the question.   
70. Before small batteries were available, carbide lamps were used for bicycle lights. Acetylene gas,  , and solid calcium hydroxide were formed by the reaction of calcium carbide,  , with water. The ignition of the acetylene gas provided the light. Currently, the same lamps are used by some cavers, and calcium carbide is used to produce acetylene for carbide cannons. (a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of  at 1.005 atm and  is formed by the reaction of  of  with water? (b) Answer the question.   
71. Calculate the volume of oxygen required to burn  of ethane gas,  , to produce carbon dioxide and water, if the volumes of  and  are measured under the same conditions of temperature and pressure.   
72. What volume of  at STP is required to oxidize  of NO at STP to  What volume of  is produced at STP?   
73. Consider the following questions: (a) What is the total volume of the  and  at  and 0.888 atm produced by the combustion of  of  measured at STP? (b) What is the partial pressure of  in the product gases?   
74. Methanol,  , is produced industrially by the following reaction: copper catalyst  ,300 atm   Assuming that the gases behave as ideal gases, find the ratio of the total volume of the reactants to the final volume.   
75. What volume of oxygen at  and a pressure of  is produced by the decomposition of 129.7 g of  to BaO and    
76. A 2.50-L sample of a colorless gas at STP decomposed to give  of  and  of  at STP. What is the colorless gas?   
77. Ethanol,  , is produced industrially from ethylene,  , by the following sequence of reactions:   What volume of ethylene at STP is required to produce 1.000 metric ton  of ethanol if the overall yield of ethanol is    
78. One molecule of hemoglobin will combine with four molecules of oxygen. If  of hemoglobin combines with  of oxygen at body temperature  and a pressure of 743 torr, what is the molar mass of hemoglobin?   
79. A sample of a compound of xenon and fluorine was confined in a bulb with a pressure of 18 torr. Hydrogen was added to the bulb until the pressure was 72 torr. Passage of an electric spark through the mixture produced Xe and HF. After the HF was removed by reaction with solid KOH, the final pressure of xenon and unreacted hydrogen in the bulb was 36 torr. What is the empirical formula of the xenon fluoride in the original sample? (Note: Xenon fluorides contain only one xenon atom per molecule.)

80. One method of analyzing amino acids is the van Slyke method. The characteristic amino groups  in protein material are allowed to react with nitrous acid,  , to form  gas. From the volume of the gas, the amount of amino acid can be determined. A  sample of a biological sample containing glycine,  , was analyzed by the van Slyke method and yielded  of  collected over water at a pressure of 735 torr and  . What was the percentage of glycine in the sample? 

9.4 Effusion and Diffusion of Gases

81. A balloon filled with helium gas takes 6 hours to deflate to  of its original volume. How long will it take for an identical balloon filled with the same volume of hydrogen gas (instead of helium) to decrease its volume by  ?   
82. Explain why the numbers of molecules are not identical in the left- and right-hand bulbs shown in the center illustration of Figure 9.27.   
83. Starting with the definition of rate of effusion and Graham’s finding relating rate and molar mass, show how to derive the Graham’s law equation, relating the relative rates of effusion for two gases to their molecular masses.   
84. Heavy water,  (molar  ), can be separated from ordinary water,  (molar mass  18.01), as a result of the difference in the relative rates of diffusion of the molecules in the gas phase. Calculate the relative rates of diffusion of  and  .   
85. Which of the following gases diffuse more slowly than oxygen?  , Ne,  ,  , NO,  ,    
86. During the discussion of gaseous diffusion for enriching uranium, it was claimed that  diffuses  faster than  . Show the calculation that supports this value. The molar mass of  23  , and the molar mass of   .   
87. Calculate the relative rate of diffusion of  (molar mass  ) compared with  (molar mass 4.0  and the relative rate of diffusion of  (molar mass  compared with  (molar mass  mol).   
88. A gas of unknown identity diffuses at a rate of  in a diffusion apparatus in which carbon dioxide diffuses at the rate of  . Calculate the molecular mass of the unknown gas.   
89. When two cotton plugs, one moistened with ammonia and the other with hydrochloric acid, are simultaneously inserted into opposite ends of a glass tube that is  long, a white ring of  forms where gaseous  and gaseous HCl first come into contact.  At approximately what distance from the ammonia moistened plug does this occur? (Hint: Calculate the rates of diffusion for both  and HCl, and find out how much faster  diffuses than HCl.)

9.5 The Kinetic-Molecular Theory

90. Using the postulates of the kinetic molecular theory, explain why a gas uniformly fills a container of any shape.

91. Can the speed of a given molecule in a gas double at constant temperature? Explain your answer.

92. Describe what happens to the average kinetic energy of ideal gas molecules when the conditions are changed as follows: (a) The pressure of the gas is increased by reducing the volume at constant temperature. (b) The pressure of the gas is increased by increasing the temperature at constant volume. (c) The average speed of the molecules is increased by a factor of 2.

93. The distribution of molecular speeds in a sample of helium is shown in Figure 9.34. If the sample is cooled, will the distribution of speeds look more like that of  or of  Explain your answer.

94. What is the ratio of the average kinetic energy of a  molecule to that of an  molecule in a mixture of two gases? What is the ratio of the root mean square speeds,  , of the two gases?

95. A 1-L sample of CO initially at STP is heated to  , and its volume is increased to  .

(a) What effect do these changes have on the number of collisions of the molecules of the gas per unit area   
of the container wall?   
(b) What is the effect on the average kinetic energy of the molecules?   
(c) What is the effect on the root mean square speed of the molecules?

96. The root mean square speed of  molecules at  is about  . What is the root mean square speed of a  molecule at 

97. Answer the following questions: (a) Is the pressure of the gas in the hot-air balloon shown at the opening of this chapter greater than, less than, or equal to that of the atmosphere outside the balloon? (b) Is the density of the gas in the hot-air balloon shown at the opening of this chapter greater than, less than, or equal to that of the atmosphere outside the balloon? (c) At a pressure of 1 atm and a temperature of  , dry air has a density of  . What is the (average) molar mass of dry air? (d) The average temperature of the gas in a hot-air balloon is  . Calculate its density, assuming the molar mass equals that of dry air. (e) The lifting capacity of a hot-air balloon is equal to the difference in the mass of the cool air displaced by the balloon and the mass of the gas in the balloon. What is the difference in the mass of  of the cool air in part (c) and the hot air in part (d)? (f) An average balloon has a diameter of 60 feet and a volume of  . What is the lifting power of such a balloon? If the weight of the balloon and its rigging is 500 pounds, what is its capacity for carrying passengers and cargo? (g) A balloon carries 40.0 gallons of liquid propane (density  . What volume of  and  gas is produced by the combustion of this propane? (h) A balloon flight can last about 90 minutes. If all of the fuel is burned during this time, what is the approximate rate of heat loss  from the hot air in the bag during the flight?

98. Show that the ratio of the rate of diffusion of Gas 1 to the rate of diffusion of Gas 2, is the same at 0 °C and  .

9.6 Non-Ideal Gas Behavior

99. Graphs showing the behavior of several different gases follow. Which of these gases exhibit behavior significantly different from that expected for ideal gases?

100. Explain why the plot of  for  differs from that of an ideal gas.

101. Under which of the following sets of conditions does a real gas behave most like an ideal gas, and for which conditions is a real gas expected to deviate from ideal behavior? Explain. (a) high pressure, small volume (b) high temperature, low pressure (c) low temperature, high pressure

102. Describe the factors responsible for the deviation of the behavior of real gases from that of an ideal gas.

103. For which of the following gases should the correction for the molecular volume be largest: CO,  ,  , He,  ,  ?

104. A 0.245-L flask contains 0.467 mol  at  . Calculate the pressure: (a) using the ideal gas law (b) using the van der Waals equation (c) Explain the reason for the difference. (d) Identify which correction (that for P or V) is dominant and why.

105. Answer the following questions:

(a) If XX behaved as an ideal gas, what would its graph of Z vs. P look like?   
(b) For most of this chapter, we performed calculations treating gases as ideal. Was this justified? (c) What is the effect of the volume of gas molecules on Z? Under what conditions is this effect small? When is it large? Explain using an appropriate diagram.   
(d) What is the effect of intermolecular attractions on the value of Z? Under what conditions is this effect small? When is it large? Explain using an appropriate diagram.   
(e) In general, under what temperature conditions would you expect Z to have the largest deviations from the Z for an ideal gas?