10.10.1 Overview

Let us now briefly look at power and temperature issues. These issues have increasingly become more important over the last decade. High performance processor chips typically dissipate 60- 120W of power during normal operation. If we have four chips in a server class computer, then we shall roughly dissipate 400W of power. As a general rule of thumb the rest of the components in a computer such as the main memory, hard disk, peripherals, and fans, also dissipate a similar amount of power. The total power consumption is roughly 800W. If we add additional overheads such as the non-ideal efficiency of the power supply, the display hardware, the power requirement goes up to about 1KW. Now, a typical server farm that has 100 servers will require 100 kW of power for running the computers. Additionally, it will require extra power for the cooling units such as air conditioners. Typically, to remove 1 W of heat, we require 0.5W of cooling power. Thus, the total power dissipation of our server farm is about 150 kW. In comparison, a typical home has a rated power of 6-8 kW. This means that the power dissipated by one server farm is equivalent the power used by 20-25 homes, which is significant. Note that a server farm containing 100 machines is a relatively small setup, and in practice we have much larger server farms containing thousands of machines. They require megawatts of power, which is enough for the needs of a small town.

Let us now consider really small devices such as the processors in cell phones. Here, also power consumption is an important issue because of the limited amount of battery life. All of us would love devices that have very long battery lives especially feature-rich smartphones. Let us now consider even smaller devices such as small processors embedded inside the body for medical applications. We typically use small microchips in devices such as pacemakers. In such cases, we do not want to inconvenience the patient by forcing him or her to also carry heavy batteries, or recharge the batteries often. To prolong battery life, it is important to dissipate as little power as possible.

Now, let us consider temperature, which is a very closely related concept. Let us take a look at the diagram of the typical package of a chip in Figure 10.36. We typically have a 200-400  silicon die. The die refers to a rectangular block of silicon that contains the circuit of the chip. Since this small piece of silicon dissipates 60-100 W of power (equivalent to 6-10 CFL light bulbs), its temperature can rise to 200◦C unless we take additional measures to cool the silicon die. We first add a  cm nickel plated copper plate on the silicon die. This is known as the spreader . The spreader helps in creating a homogeneous temperature profile on the die by spreading the heat, and thus eliminating hot spots. We need a spreader because all the parts of a chip do not dissipate the same amount of heat. The ALUs typically dissipate a lot of heat. However, the memory elements, are relatively cooler. Secondly, the heat dissipation depends on the nature of the program. For integer benchmarks, the floating point ALU is idle, and thus it will be much cooler. To ensure that heat properly flows from the silicon die to the spreader we typically add a thermally conducting gel known as the thermal interface material (TIM).

Most chips have a structure known as the heat sink placed above the spreader. It is a copper-based structure that has an array of fins as shown in Figure 10.36. We add an array of fins to increase its surface area. This ensures that most of the heat generated by the processors can get dissipated to the surrounding air. In chips that are used in desktops, laptops, and servers, we have a fan mounted on the heat sink, or in the chassis of the computer that blows air over the heat sink. This ensures that hot air is dissipated away, and colder air from outside flows over the heat sink. The assembly of the spreader, heat sink, and fan help in dissipating most of the heat generated by the processor.

In spite of advanced cooling technology, processors still heat up to 60-100◦C . While playing highly interactive computer games, or while running heavy number crunching applications like weather simulation, on-chip temperatures can go up to 120◦C . Such temperatures are high enough to boil water, cook vegetables, and even warm a small room in winter. Instead of buying heaters, we can just run a computer!!! Note that temperature has a lot of deleterious effects. In particular, the reliability of on-chip copper wires, and transistors decreases exponentially with increasing temperature [Srinivasan et al., 2004]. Secondly, chips tend to age over time due to an effect known as NBTI (Negative Bias Temperature Instability). Ageing effectively slows down transistors. Hence, it becomes necessary to reduce the frequency of processors over time to ensure correct operation. Secondly, some power dissipation mechanisms such as leakage power are dependent on temperature. This means that as the temperature goes up the leakage component of the total power also goes up, and this further increases temperature.

Let us thus conclude that it is very important to reduce on-chip power and temperature in the interest of lower electricity bills, reduced cooling costs, longer battery life, higher reliability, and slower aging.

Let us now quickly review the main power dissipation mechanisms. We shall primarily focus on two mechanisms namely dynamic and leakage power. Leakage power is also known as static power.