15.5 Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Describe the different steps in protein synthesis Discuss the role of ribosomes in protein synthesis

The synthesis of proteins consumes more of a cell’s energy than any other metabolic process. In turn, proteins account for more mass than any other component of living organisms (with the exception of water), and proteins perform virtually every function of a cell. The process of translation, or protein synthesis, involves the decoding of an mRNA message into a polypeptide product. Amino acids are covalently strung together by interlinking peptide bonds in lengths ranging from approximately 50 to more

than 1000 amino acid residues. Each individual amino acid has an amino group  and a carboxyl (COOH) group. Polypeptides are formed when the amino group of one amino acid forms an amide (i.e., peptide) bond with the carboxyl group of another amino acid (Figure 15.15). This reaction is catalyzed by ribosomes and generates one water molecule.

The Protein Synthesis Machinery

In addition to the mRNA template, many molecules and macromolecules contribute to the process of translation. The composition of each component may vary across species; for example, ribosomes may consist of different numbers of rRNAs and polypeptides depending on the organism. However, the general structures and functions of the protein synthesis machinery are comparable from bacteria to human cells. Translation requires the input of an mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors. (Note: A ribosome can be thought of as an enzyme whose amino acid binding sites are specified by mRNA.)

LINK TO LEARNING

Click through the steps of this PBS interactive (http://openstax.org/l/prokary_protein) to see protein synthesis in action.

Ribosomes

Even before an mRNA is translated, a cell must invest energy to build each of its ribosomes. In E.coli, there are between 10,000 and 70,000 ribosomes present in each cell at any given time. A ribosome is a complex macromolecule composed of structural and catalytic rRNAs, and many distinct polypeptides. In eukaryotes, the nucleolus is completely specialized for the synthesis and assembly of rRNAs.

Ribosomes exist in the cytoplasm of prokaryotes and in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum of eukaryotes. Mitochondria and chloroplasts also have their own ribosomes in the matrix and stroma, which look more similar to prokaryotic ribosomes (and have similar drug sensitivities) than the ribosomes just outside their outer membranes in the cytoplasm. Ribosomes dissociate into large and small subunits when they are not synthesizing proteins and reassociate during the initiation of translation.InE.coli,thesmal subunitisdescribedas30S,andthelargesubunitis50S,foratotalof70S(recal thatSvedbergunitsarenotad itive).Mammalian ribosomes have a small 40S subunit and a large 60S subunit, for a total of 80S. The small subunit is responsible for binding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit sequentially binds tRNAs. Each mRNA molecule is simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synthesizing protein in the same direction: reading the mRNA from 5' to  and synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus. The complete mRNA/polyribosome structure is called a polysome.

tRNAs

The tRNAs are structural RNA molecules that were transcribed from genes by RNA polymerase III. Depending on the species, 40 to 60 types of tRNAs exist in the cytoplasm. Transfer RNAs serve as adaptor molecules. Each tRNA carries a specific amino acid and recognizes one or more of the mRNA codons that define the order of amino acids in a protein. Aminoacyl-tRNAs bind to the ribosome and add the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide chain. Therefore, tRNAs are the molecules that actually

“translate” the language of RNA into the language of proteins.

Of the 64 possible mRNA codons—or triplet combinations of A, U, G, and C—three specify the termination of protein synthesis and 61 specify the addition of amino acids to the polypeptide chain. Of these 61, one codon (AUG) also encodes the initiation of translation. Each tRNA anticodon can base pair with one or more of the mRNA codons for its amino acid. For instance, if the sequence CUA occurred on an mRNA template in the proper reading frame, it would bind a leucine tRNA expressing the complementary sequence, GAU. The ability of some tRNAs to match more than one codon is what gives the genetic code its blocky structure.

As the adaptor molecules of translation, it is surprising that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a small package. Consider that tRNAs need to interact with three factors: 1) they must be recognized by the correct aminoacyl synthetase (see below); 2) they must be recognized by ribosomes; and 3) they must bind to the correct sequence in mRNA.

Aminoacyl tRNA Synthetases

The process of pre-tRNA synthesis by RNA polymerase III only creates the RNA portion of the adaptor molecule. The corresponding amino acid must be added later, once the tRNA is processed and exported to the cytoplasm. Through the process of tRNA “charging,” each tRNA molecule is linked to its correct amino acid by one of a group of enzymes called aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. At least one type of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase exists for each of the 20 amino acids; the exact number of aminoacyl tRNA synthetases varies by species. These enzymes first bind and hydrolyze ATP to catalyze a high-energy bond between an amino acid and adenosine monophosphate (AMP); a pyrophosphate molecule is expelled in this reaction. The activated amino acid is then transferred to the tRNA, and AMP is released. The term "charging" is appropriate, since the highenergy bond that attaches an amino acid to its tRNA is later used to drive the formation of the peptide bond. Each tRNA is named for its amino acid.

The Mechanism of Protein Synthesis

As with mRNA synthesis, protein synthesis can be divided into three phases: initiation,elongation,andtermination. The process of translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we’ll explore how translation occurs in E.coli, a representative prokaryote, and specify any differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic translation.

Initiation of Translation

Protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initiation complex. In E.coli, this complex involves the small 30S ribosome, the mRNA template, three initiation factors (IFs; IF-1, IF-2, and IF-3), and a special initiator tRNA, called tRNAMetf.

In E.colimRNA, a sequence upstream of the first AUG codon, called the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (AGGAGG), interacts with the rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome. This interaction anchors the 30S ribosomal subunit at the correct location on the mRNA template. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), which is a purine nucleotide triphosphate, acts as an energy source during translation—both at the start of elongation and during the ribosome’s translocation. Binding of the mRNA to the 30S ribosome also requires IF-III.

The initiator tRNA then interacts with the start codon AUG (or rarely, GUG). This tRNA carries the amino acid methionine, which is formylated after its attachment to the tRNA. The formylation creates a "faux" peptide bond between the formyl carboxyl group and the amino group of the methionine. Binding of the fMet-tRNAMetf is mediated by the initiation factor IF-2. The fMet begins every polypeptide chain synthesized by E.coli, but it is usually removed after translation is complete. When an in-frame AUG is encountered during translation elongation, a non-formylated methionine is inserted by a regular Met-tRNAMet. After the formation of the initiation complex, the 30S ribosomal subunit is joined by the 50S subunit to form the translation complex. In eukaryotes, a similar initiation complex forms, comprising mRNA, the 40S small ribosomal subunit, eukaryotic IFs, and nucleoside triphosphates (GTP and ATP). The methionine on the charged initiator tRNA, called Met-tRNAi, is not formylated. However, Met-tRNAi is distinct from other Met-tRNAs in that it can bind IFs.

Instead of depositing at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizes the 7-methylguanosine cap at the 5' end of the mRNA. A cap-binding protein (CBP) and several other IFs assist the movement of the ribosome to the 5' cap. Once at the cap, the initiation complex tracks along the mRNA in the  to 3' direction, searching for the AUG start codon. Many eukaryotic mRNAs are translated from the first AUG, but this is not always the case. According to Kozak’s rules, the nucleotides around the AUG indicate whether it is the correct start codon. Kozak’s rules state that the following consensus sequence must appear around the AUG of vertebrate genes:  -gccRccAUGG-3'. The R (for purine) indicates a site that can be either A or G, but cannot be C or U. Essentially, the closer the sequence is to this consensus, the higher the efficiency of translation.

Once the appropriate AUG is identified, the other proteins and CBP dissociate, and the 60S subunit binds to the complex of Met-tRNAi, mRNA, and the 40S subunit. This step completes the initiation of translation in eukaryotes.

Translation, Elongation, and Termination

In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongation are the same, so we will review elongation from the perspective of  . coli. When the translation complex is formed, the tRNA binding region of the ribosome consists of three compartments. The A (aminoacyl) site binds incoming charged aminoacyl tRNAs. The P (peptidyl) site binds charged tRNAs carrying amino acids that have formed peptide bonds with the growing polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociated from their corresponding tRNA. The E (exit) site releases dissociated tRNAs so that they can be recharged with free amino acids. The initiating methionyl-tRNA, however, occupies the P site at the beginning of the elongation phase of translation in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

During translation elongation, the mRNA template provides tRNA binding specificity. As the ribosome moves along the mRNA, each mRNA codon comes into register, and specific binding with the corresponding charged tRNA anticodon is ensured. If mRNA were not present in the elongation complex, the ribosome would bind tRNAs nonspecifically and randomly (?).

Elongation proceeds with charged tRNAs sequentially entering and leaving the ribosome as each new amino acid is added to the polypeptide chain. Movement of a tRNA from A to P to E site is induced by conformational changes that advance the ribosome by three bases in the 3' direction. The energy for each step along the ribosome is donated by elongation factors that hydrolyze GTP. GTP energy is required both for the binding of a new aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site and for its translocation to the P site after formation of the peptide bond. Peptide bonds form between the amino group of the amino acid attached to the A-site tRNA and the carboxyl group of the amino acid attached to the P-site tRNA. The formation of each peptide bond is catalyzed by peptidyl transferase, an RNA-based enzyme that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit. The energy for each peptide bond formation is derived from the high-energy bond linking each amino acid to its tRNA. After peptide bond formation, the A-site tRNA that now holds the growing peptide chain moves to the P site, and the P-site tRNA that is now empty moves to the E site and is expelled from the ribosome (Figure 15.16). Amazingly, the E.colitranslation apparatus takes only 0.05 seconds to add each amino acid, meaning that a 200-amino-acid protein can be translated in just 10 seconds.

Many antibiotics inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. For example, tetracycline blocks the A site on the bacterial ribosome, and chloramphenicol blocks peptidyl transfer. What specific effect would you expect each of these antibiotics to have on protein synthesis?

Tetracycline would directly affect:

a. tRNA binding to the ribosome b. ribosome assembly c. growth of the protein chain

Chloramphenicol would directly affect:

a. tRNA binding to the ribosome b. ribosome assembly c. growth of the protein chain

Termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is encountered. Upon aligning with the A site, these nonsense codons are recognized by proteinreleasefactorsthat resemble tRNAs. The releasing factors in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes instruct peptidyl transferase to add a water molecule to the carboxyl end of the P-site amino acid. This reaction forces the P-site amino acid to detach from its tRNA, and the newly made protein is released. The small and large ribosomal subunits dissociate from the mRNA and from each other; they are recruited almost immediately into another translation

initiation complex. After many ribosomes have completed translation, the mRNA is degraded so the nucleotides can be reused in another transcription reaction.

Protein Folding, Modification, and Targeting

During and after translation, individual amino acids may be chemically modified, signal sequences appended, and the new protein “folded” into a distinct three-dimensional structure as a result of intramolecular interactions. A signal sequence is a short sequence at the amino end of a protein that directs it to a specific cellular compartment. These sequences can be thought of as the protein’s “train ticket” to its ultimate destination, and are recognized by signal-recognition proteins that act as conductors. For instance, a specific signal sequence terminus will direct a protein to the mitochondria or chloroplasts (in plants). Once the protein reaches its cellular destination, the signal sequence is usually clipped off.

Many proteins fold spontaneously, but some proteins require helper molecules, called chaperones, to prevent them from aggregating during the complicated process of folding. Even if a protein is properly specified by its corresponding mRNA, it could take on a completely dysfunctional shape if abnormal temperature or  conditions prevent it from folding correctly.

KEY TERMS

7-methylguanosine cap modification added to the 5' end of pre-mRNAs to protect mRNA from degradation and assist translation   
aminoacyl tRNA synthetase enzyme that “charges” tRNA molecules by catalyzing a bond between the tRNA and a corresponding amino acid   
anticodon three-nucleotide sequence in a tRNA molecule that corresponds to an mRNA codon   
CAAT box (GGCCAATCT) essential eukaryotic promoter sequence involved in binding transcription factors   
central dogma states that genes specify the sequence of mRNAs, which in turn specify the sequence of proteins   
codon three consecutive nucleotides in mRNA that specify the insertion of an amino acid or the release of a polypeptide chain during translation   
colinear in terms of RNA and protein, three “units” of RNA (nucleotides) specify one “unit” of protein (amino acid) in a consecutive fashion   
consensus DNA sequence that is used by many species to perform the same or similar functions   
core enzyme prokaryotic RNA polymerase consisting of  ,  , and  but missing  this complex performs elongation   
degeneracy (of the genetic code) describes that a given amino acid can be encoded by more than one nucleotide triplet; the code is degenerate, but not ambiguous   
downstream nucleotides following the initiation site in the direction of mRNA transcription; in general, sequences that are toward the  end relative to a site on the mRNA   
exon sequence present in protein-coding mRNA after completion of pre-mRNA splicing   
FACT complex that “facilitates chromatin transcription” by disassembling nucleosomes ahead of a transcribing RNA polymerase II and reassembling them after the polymerase passes by   
GC-rich box (GGCG) nonessential eukaryotic promoter sequence that binds cellular factors to increase the efficiency of transcription; may be present several times in a promoter   
hairpin structure of RNA when it folds back on itself and forms intramolecular hydrogen bonds between complementary nucleotides   
holoenzyme prokaryotic RNA polymerase consisting of  ,  , and  ; this complex is responsible for transcription initiation   
initiation site nucleotide from which mRNA synthesis proceeds in the  to  direction; denoted with a    
initiator tRNA in prokaryotes, called  ; in eukaryotes, called  ; a tRNA that interacts with a start codon, binds directly to the ribosome P site, and links to a special methionine to begin a polypeptide chain

spliced from mRNA during processing Kozak’s rules determines the correct initiation AUG in a eukaryotic mRNA; the following consensus sequence must appear around the AUG:  - GCC(purine)CCAUGG-  ; the bolded bases are most important nonsense codon one of the three mRNA codons that specifies termination of translation nontemplate strand strand of DNA that is not used to transcribe mRNA; this strand is identical to the mRNA except that T nucleotides in the DNA are replaced by U nucleotides in the mRNA Octamer box (ATTTGCAT) nonessential eukaryotic promoter sequence that binds cellular factors to increase the efficiency of transcription; may be present several times in a promoter peptidyl transferase RNA-based enzyme that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit and catalyzes the formation of peptide bonds plasmid extrachromosomal, covalently closed, circular DNA molecule that may only contain one or a few genes; common in prokaryotes poly-A tail modification added to the  end of pre-mRNAs to protect mRNA from degradation and assist mRNA export from the nucleus polysome mRNA molecule simultaneously being translated by many ribosomes all going in the same direction preinitiation complex cluster of transcription factors and other proteins that recruit RNA polymerase II for transcription of a DNA template promoter DNA sequence to which RNA polymerase and associated factors bind and initiate transcription reading frame sequence of triplet codons in mRNA that specify a particular protein; a ribosome shift of one or two nucleotides in either direction completely abolishes synthesis of that protein rho-dependent termination in prokaryotes, termination of transcription by an interaction between RNA polymerase and the rho protein at a run of G nucleotides on the DNA template rho-independent termination sequence-dependent termination of prokaryotic mRNA synthesis; caused by hairpin formation in the mRNA that stalls the polymerase RNA editing direct alteration of one or more nucleotides in an mRNA that has already been synthesized Shine-Dalgarno sequence (AGGAGG); initiates prokaryotic translation by interacting with rRNA molecules comprising the 30S ribosome signal sequence short tail of amino acids that directs a protein to a specific cellular compartment small nuclear RNA molecules synthesized by RNA

polymerase III that have a variety of functions, including splicing pre-mRNAs and regulating transcription factors   
splicing process of removing introns and reconnecting exons in a pre-mRNA   
start codon AUG (or rarely, GUG) on an mRNA from which translation begins; always specifies methionine   
TATA box conserved promoter sequence in eukaryotes and prokaryotes that helps to establish the initiation site for transcription   
template strand strand of DNA that specifies the complementary mRNA molecule   
transcription bubble region of locally unwound DNA that allows for transcription of mRNA   
upstream nucleotides preceding the initiation site; in general, sequences toward the 5' end relative to a site on the mRNA

CHAPTER SUMMARY 15.1 The Genetic Code

The genetic code refers to the DNA alphabet (A, T, C, G), the RNA alphabet (A, U, C, G), and the polypeptide alphabet (20 amino acids). The central dogma describes the flow of genetic information in the cell from genes to mRNA to proteins. Genes are used to make mRNA by the process of transcription; mRNA is used to synthesize proteins by the process of translation. The genetic code is degenerate because 64 triplet codons in mRNA specify only 20 amino acids and three nonsense codons. Most amino acids have several similar codons. Almost every species on the planet uses the same genetic code.

15.2 Prokaryotic Transcription

In prokaryotes, mRNA synthesis is initiated at a promoter sequence on the DNA template comprising two consensus sequences that recruit RNA polymerase. The prokaryotic polymerase consists of a core enzyme of four protein subunits and a  protein that assists only with initiation. Elongation synthesizes mRNA in the 5' to  direction at a rate of 40 nucleotides per second. Termination liberates the mRNA and occurs either by rho protein interaction or by the formation of an mRNA hairpin.

15.3 Eukaryotic Transcription

Transcription in eukaryotes involves one of three types of polymerases, depending on the gene being transcribed. RNA polymerase II transcribes all of the protein-coding genes, whereas RNA polymerase I transcribes the tandemly duplicated rRNA genes, and RNA polymerase III transcribes various small RNAs, like the 5S rRNA, tRNA, and small nuclear RNA genes. The initiation of transcription in eukaryotes involves the binding of several transcription factors to complex promoter sequences that are usually located upstream of the gene being copied. The mRNA is synthesized in the 5' to  direction, and the FACT complex moves and reassembles nucleosomes as the polymerase

passes by. Whereas RNA polymerases I and III terminate transcription by protein- or RNA hairpin-dependent methods, RNA polymerase II transcribes for 1,000 or more nucleotides beyond the gene template and cleaves the excess during pre-mRNA processing.

15.4 RNA Processing in Eukaryotes

Eukaryotic pre-mRNAs are modified with a 5' methylguanosine cap and a poly-A tail. These structures protect the mature mRNA from degradation and help export it from the nucleus. Pre-mRNAs also undergo splicing, in which introns are removed and exons are reconnected with single-nucleotide accuracy. Only finished mRNAs that have undergone 5' capping,  polyadenylation, and intron splicing are exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Pre-rRNAs and pre-tRNAs may be processed by intramolecular cleavage, splicing, methylation, and chemical conversion of nucleotides. Rarely, RNA editing is also performed to insert missing bases after an mRNA has been synthesized.

15.5 Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis

The players in translation include the mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors. The small ribosomal subunit binds to the mRNA template either at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (prokaryotes) or the 5' cap (eukaryotes). Translation begins at the initiating AUG on the mRNA, specifying methionine. The formation of peptide bonds occurs between sequential amino acids matched to the mRNA template by their tRNAs according to the genetic code. Charged tRNAs enter the ribosomal A site, and their amino acid bonds with the amino acid at the P site. The entire mRNA is translated in three-nucleotide “steps” of the ribosome. When a nonsense codon is encountered, a release factor binds and dissociates the components and frees the new protein. Folding of the protein occurs during and after translation.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 15.11 A scientist splices a eukaryotic promoter in front of a bacterial gene and inserts the gene in a bacterial chromosome. Would you expect the bacteria to transcribe the gene?

2. Figure 15.13 Errors in splicing are implicated in cancers and other human diseases. What kinds of mutations might lead to splicing errors? Think of different possible outcomes if splicing errors occur.

3. Figure 15.16 Many antibiotics inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. For example, tetracycline blocks the A site on the bacterial ribosome, and chloramphenicol blocks peptidyl transfer. What specific effect would you expect each of these antibiotics to have on protein synthesis? Tetracycline would directly affect:

a. tRNA binding to the ribosome b. ribosome assembly c. growth of the protein chain

Chloramphenicol would directly affect a. tRNA binding to the ribosome b. ribosome assembly c. growth of the protein chain

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. The AUC and AUA codons in mRNA both specify isoleucine. What feature of the genetic code explains this?

a. complementarity b. nonsense codons c. universality d. degeneracy

5. How many nucleotides are in 12 mRNA codons?

a. 12   
b. 24   
c. 36   
d. 48

6. Which event contradicts the central dogma of molecular biology?

a. Poly-A polymerase enzymes process mRNA in the nucleus.   
b. Endonuclease enzymes splice out and repair damaged DNA.   
c. Scientists use reverse transcriptase enzymes to make DNA from RNA.   
d. Codons specifying amino acids are degenerate and universal.

8. The -10 and -35 regions of prokaryotic promoters are called consensus sequences because

a. they are identical in all bacterial species b. they are similar in all bacterial species c. they exist in all organisms d. they have the same function in all organisms

9. Three different bacteria species have the following consensus sequences upstream of a conserved gene.

Order the bacteria from most to least efficient initiation of gene transcription.

a.    
b.    
c.    
d. 

7. Which subunit of the E.colipolymerase confers specificity to transcription?

a.    
b.    
c.    
d. 

10. Which feature of promoters can be found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes?

a. GC box   
b. TATA box   
c. octamer box   
d. -10 and -35 sequences

11. What transcripts will be most affected by low levels of  - amanitin?

a. 18S and 28S rRNAs b. pre-mRNAs c. 5S rRNAs and tRNAs d. other small nuclear RNAs

12. How do enhancers and promoters differ?

a. Enhancers bind transcription factors to silence gene expression, while promoters activate transcription.   
b. Enhancers increase the efficiency of gene expression, but are not essential for transcription. Promoter recognition is essential to transcription initiation.   
c. Promoters bind transcription factors to increase the efficiency of transcription. Enhancers bind RNA polymerases to initiate transcription.   
d. There is no difference. Both are transcription factor-binding sequences in DNA.

13. Which pre-mRNA processing step is important for initiating translation?

a. poly-A tail   
b. RNA editing   
c. splicing   
d. 7-methylguanosine cap

14. What processing step enhances the stability of pretRNAs and pre-rRNAs?

a. methylation   
b. nucleotide modification   
c. cleavage   
d. splicing

15. A scientist identifies a pre-mRNA with the following structure.

What is the predicted size of the corresponding mature mRNA in base pairs (bp), excluding the 5’ cap and 3’ polyA tail?

a. 220bp b. 295bp c. 140bp d. 435bp

16. The RNA components of ribosomes are synthesized in the

a. cytoplasm   
b. nucleus   
c. nucleolus   
d. endoplasmic reticulum

17. In any given species, there are at least how many types of aminoacyl tRNA synthetases?

a. 20   
b. 40   
c. 100   
d. 200

18. A scientist introduces a mutation that makes the 60S ribosomal subunit nonfunctional in a human cell line. What would be the predicted effect on translation?

a. Translation stalls after the initiation AUG codon is identified.   
b. The ribosome cannot catalyze the formation of peptide bonds between the tRNAs in the A and P sites.   
c. The ribosome cannot interact with mRNAs.   
d. tRNAs cannot exit the E site of the ribosome.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

19. Imagine if there were 200 commonly occurring amino acids instead of 20. Given what you know about the genetic code, what would be the shortest possible codon length? Explain.   
20. Discuss how degeneracy of the genetic code makes cells more robust to mutations.   
21. A scientist sequencing mRNA identifies the following strand: CUAUGUGUCGUAACAGCCGAUGACCCG What is the sequence of the amino acid chain this mRNA makes when it is translated?   
22. If mRNA is complementary to the DNA template strand and the DNA template strand is complementary to the DNA nontemplate strand, then why are base sequences of mRNA and the DNA nontemplate strand not identical? Could they ever be?   
23. In your own words, describe the difference between rhodependent and rho-independent termination of transcription in prokaryotes.   
24. A fragment of bacterial DNA reads: 3’ –TACCTATAATCTCAATTGATAGAAGCACTCTAC– 5’ Assuming that this fragment is the template strand, what is the sequence of mRNA that would be transcribed? (Hint: Be sure to identify the initiation site.)   
25. A scientist observes that a cell has an RNA polymerase deficiency that prevents it from making proteins. Describe three additional observations that would together support the conclusion that a defect in RNA polymerase I activity, and not problems with the other polymerases, causes the defect.   
26. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients often harbor nonsense mutations in their spliceosome machinery. Describe how this mutation of the spliceosome would change the final location and sequence of a pre-mRNA.   
27. Transcribe and translate the following DNA sequence (nontemplate strand):  -ATGGCCGGTTATTAAGCA-3'   
28. Explain how single nucleotide changes can have vastly different effects on protein function.

29. A normal mRNA that reads 5’ – UGCCAUGGUAAUAACACAUGAGGCCUGAAC– 3’ has an insertion mutation that changes the sequence to 5’ -UGCCAUGGUUAAUAACACAUGAGGCCUGAAC– 3’. Translate the original mRNA and the mutated mRNA, and explain how insertion mutations can have dramatic effects on proteins. (Hint: Be sure to find the initiation site.)