4.6 Connections between Cells and Cellular Activities

Bytheendofthissection,youwil beabletodothefolowing:

Describe the extracellular matrix List examples of the ways that plant cells and animal cells communicate with adjacent cells Summarize the roles of tight junctions, desmosomes, gap junctions, and plasmodesmata

You already know that tissue is a group of similar cells working together. As you might expect, if cells are to work together, they must communicate with each other, just as you need to communicate with others if you work on a group project. Let’s take a look at how cells communicate with each other.

Extracellular Matrix of Animal Cells

While cells in most multicellular organisms release materials into the extracellular space, animal cells will be discussed as an example. The primary components of these materials are proteins, and the most abundant protein is collagen. Collagen fibers are interwoven with proteoglycans, which are carbohydrate-containing protein molecules. Collectively, we call these materials the extracellular matrix (Figure 4.27). Not only does the extracellular matrix hold the cells together to form a tissue, but it also allows the cells within the tissue to communicate with each other. How can this happen?

Cells have protein receptors on their plasma membranes' extracellular surfaces. When a molecule within the matrix binds to the receptor, it changes the receptor's molecular structure. The receptor, in turn, changes the microfilaments' conformation positioned just inside the plasma membrane. These conformational changes induce chemical signals inside the cell that reach the nucleus and turn “on” or “off” the transcription of specific DNA sections, which affects the associated protein production, thus changing the activities within the cell.

Blood clotting provides an example of the extracellular matrix's role in cell communication. When the cells lining a blood vessel are damaged, they display a protein receptor, which we call tissue factor. When tissue factor binds with another factor in the extracellular matrix, it causes platelets to adhere to the damaged blood vessel's wall, stimulates the adjacent smooth muscle cells in the blood vessel to contract (thus constricting the blood vessel), and initiates a series of steps that stimulate the platelets to produce clotting factors.

Intercellular Junctions

Cells can also communicate with each other via direct contact, or intercellular junctions. There are differences in the ways that plant and animal and fungal cells communicate. Plasmodesmata are junctions between plant cells; whereas, animal cell contacts include tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes.

Plasmodesmata

In general, long stretches of the plasma membranes of neighboring plant cells cannot touch one another because the cell wall that surrounds each cell separates them (Figure 4.8). How then, can a plant transfer water and other soil nutrients from its roots, through its stems, and to its leaves? Such transport uses the vascular tissues (xylem and phloem) primarily. There also exist structural modifications, which we call plasmodesmata (singular  plasmodesma). Numerous channels that pass between adjacent plant cells' cell walls connect their cytoplasm, and enable transport of materials from cell to cell, and thus throughout the plant (Figure 4.28).

Tight Junctions

A tight junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cells (Figure 4.29). Proteins (predominantly two proteins called claudins and occludins) tightly hold the cells against each other.

This tight adherence prevents materials from leaking between the cells; tight junctions are typically found in epithelial tissues that line internal organs and cavities, and comprise most of the skin. For example, the tight junctions of the epithelial cells lining your urinary bladder prevent urine from leaking out into the extracellular space.

Desmosomes

Also only in animal cells are desmosomes, which act like spot welds between adjacent epithelial cells (Figure 4.30). Cadherins, short proteins in the plasma membrane connect to intermediate filaments to create desmosomes. The cadherins connect two

adjacent cells and maintain the cells in a sheet-like formation in organs and tissues that stretch, like the skin, heart, and muscles.

Desmosome

Gap Junctions

Gap junctions in animal cells are like plasmodesmata in plant cells in that they are channels between adjacent cells that allow for transporting ions, nutrients, and other substances that enable cells to communicate (Figure 4.31). Structurally, however, gap junctions and plasmodesmata differ.

Gap junction

Gap junctions develop when a set of six proteins (connexins) in the plasma membrane arrange themselves in an elongated donut-like configuration - a connexon. When the connexon's pores (“doughnut holes”) in adjacent animal cells align, a channel between the two cells forms. Gap junctions are particularly important in cardiac muscle. The electrical signal for the muscle to contract passes efficiently through gap junctions, allowing the heart muscle cells to contract in tandem.

LINK TO LEARNING

To conduct a virtual microscopy lab and review the parts of a cell, work through the steps of this interactive assignment (http://openstax.org/l/microscopy_lab) .

KEY TERMS

cell theory see unified cell theory   
cell wall rigid cell covering comprised of various molecules that protects the cell, provides structural support, and gives shape to the cell   
central vacuole large plant cell organelle that regulates the cell’s storage compartment, holds water, and plays a significant role in cell growth as the site of macromolecule degradation   
centrosome region in animal cells made of two centrioles that serves as an organizing center for microtubules   
chlorophyll green pigment that captures the light energy that drives the light reactions of photosynthesis   
chloroplast plant cell organelle that carries out photosynthesis   
chromatin protein-DNA complex that serves as the chromosomes' building material   
chromosome structure within the nucleus that comprises chromatin that contains DNA, the hereditary material   
cilium (plural  cilia) short, hair-like structure that extends from the plasma membrane in large numbers and functions to move an entire cell or move substances along the cell's outer surface   
cytoplasm entire region between the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope, consisting of organelles suspended in the gel-like cytosol, the cytoskeleton, and various chemicals   
cytoskeleton protein fiber network that collectively maintains the cell's shape, secures some organelles in specific positions, allows cytoplasm and vesicles to move within the cell, and enables unicellular organisms to move independently   
cytosol the cytoplasm's gel-like material in which cell structures are suspended   
desmosome linkages between adjacent epithelial cells that form when cadherins in the plasma membrane attach to intermediate filaments   
electron microscope an instrument that magnifies an object using an electron beam that passes and bends through a lens system to visualize a specimen   
endomembrane system group of organelles and membranes in eukaryotic cells that work together modifying, packaging, and transporting lipids and proteins   
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) series of interconnected membranous structures within eukaryotic cells that collectively modify proteins and synthesize lipids   
eukaryotic cell cell that has a membrane-bound nucleus and several other membrane-bound compartments or sacs   
extracellular matrix material secreted from animal or fungal cells that provides mechanical protection and anchoring for the cells in the tissue   
flagellum (plural  flagella) long, hair-like structure that extends from the plasma membrane and moves the cell   
gap junction channel between two adjacent animal cells that allows ions, nutrients, and low molecular weight substances to pass between cells, enabling the cells to communicate   
Golgi apparatus eukaryotic organelle comprised of a series of stacked membranes that sorts, tags, and packages lipids and proteins for distribution   
intermediate filament cytoskeletal component, comprised of several fibrous protein intertwined strands, that bears tension, supports cell-cell junctions, and anchors cells to extracellular structures   
light microscope an instrument that magnifies an object using a beam of visible light that passes and bends through a lens system to visualize a specimen   
lysosome organelle in an animal cell that functions as the cell’s digestive component; it breaks down proteins, polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids, and even worn-out organelles   
microfilament the cytoskeleton system's narrowest element; it provides rigidity and shape to the cell and enables cellular movements   
microscope an instrument that magnifies an object   
microtubule the cytoskeleton system's widest element; it helps the cell resist compression, provides a track along which vesicles move through the cell, pulls replicated chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing cell, and is the structural element of centrioles, flagella, and cilia   
mitochondria (singular  mitochondrion) cellular organelles responsible for carrying out cellular respiration, resulting in producing ATP, the cell’s main energy-carrying molecule   
nuclear envelope double-membrane structure that constitutes the nucleus' outermost portion   
nucleoid central part of a prokaryotic cell's central part where the chromosome is located   
nucleolus darkly staining body within the nucleus that is responsible for assembling ribosome subunits   
nucleoplasm semi-solid fluid inside the nucleus that contains the chromatin and nucleolus   
nucleus cell organelle that houses the cell’s DNA and directs ribosome and protein synthesis   
organelle compartment or sac within a cell   
peroxisome small, round organelle that contains hydrogen peroxide, oxidizes fatty acids and amino acids, and detoxifies many poisons   
plasma membrane phospholipid bilayer with embedded (integral) or attached (peripheral) proteins, and separates the cell's internal content from its surrounding environment   
plasmodesma (plural  plasmodesmata) channel that passes between adjacent plant cells' cell walls, connects their cytoplasm, and allows transporting of materials from cell to cell   
prokaryote unicellular organism that lacks a nucleus or any other membrane-bound organelle   
ribosome cellular structure that carries out protein synthesis   
rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) region of the endoplasmic reticulum that is studded with ribosomes and engages in protein modification and phospholipid synthesis   
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) region of the endoplasmic reticulum that has few or no ribosomes on its cytoplasmic surface and synthesizes carbohydrates, lipids, and steroid hormones; detoxifies certain chemicals (like pesticides, preservatives, medications, and environmental pollutants), and stores calcium ions   
tight junction protein adherence that creates a firm seal between two adjacent animal cells   
unified cell theory a biological concept that states that one or more cells comprise all organisms; the cell is the basic unit of life; and new cells arise from existing cells   
vacuole membrane-bound sac, somewhat larger than a vesicle, which functions in cellular storage and transport   
vesicle small, membrane-bound sac that functions in cellular storage and transport; its membrane is capable of fusing with the plasma membrane and the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus

CHAPTER SUMMARY 4.1 Studying Cells

A cell is the smallest unit of life. Most cells are so tiny that we cannot see them with the naked eye. Therefore, scientists use microscopes to study cells. Electron microscopes provide higher magnification, higher resolution, and more detail than light microscopes. The unified cell theory states that one or more cells comprise all organisms, the cell is the basic unit of life, and new cells arise from existing cells.

4.2 Prokaryotic Cells

Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms of the domains Bacteria and Archaea. All prokaryotes have plasma membranes, cytoplasm, ribosomes, and DNA that is not membrane-bound. Most have peptidoglycan cell walls and many have polysaccharide capsules. Prokaryotic cells range in diameter from 0.1 to 5.0 μm.

As a cell increases in size, its surface area-to-volume ratio decreases. If the cell grows too large, the plasma membrane will not have sufficient surface area to support the rate of diffusion required for the increased volume.

4.3 Eukaryotic Cells

Like a prokaryotic cell, a eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and ribosomes, but a eukaryotic cell is typically larger than a prokaryotic cell, has a true nucleus (meaning a membrane surrounds its DNA), and has other membrane-bound organelles that allow for compartmentalizing functions. The plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins. The nucleus’s nucleolus is the site of ribosome assembly. We find ribosomes either in the cytoplasm or attached to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane or endoplasmic reticulum. They perform protein synthesis. Mitochondria participate in cellular respiration. They are responsible for the majority of ATP produced in the cell. Peroxisomes

hydrolyze fatty acids, amino acids, and some toxins. Vesicles and vacuoles are storage and transport compartments. In plant cells, vacuoles also help break down macromolecules.

Animal cells also have a centrosome and lysosomes. The centrosome has two bodies perpendicular to each other, the centrioles, and has an unknown purpose in cell division. Lysosomes are the digestive organelles of animal cells.

Plant cells and plant-like cells each have a cell wall, chloroplasts, and a central vacuole. The plant cell wall, whose primary component is cellulose, protects the cell, provides structural support, and gives the cell shape. Photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts. The central vacuole can expand without having to produce more cytoplasm.

4.4 The Endomembrane System and Proteins

The endomembrane system includes the nuclear envelope, lysosomes, vesicles, the ER, and Golgi apparatus, as well as the plasma membrane. These cellular components work together to modify, package, tag, and transport proteins and lipids that form the membranes.

The RER modifies proteins and synthesizes phospholipids in cell membranes. The SER synthesizes carbohydrates, lipids, and steroid hormones; engages in the detoxification of medications and poisons; and stores calcium ions. Sorting, tagging, packaging, and distributing lipids and proteins take place in the Golgi apparatus. Budding RER and Golgi membranes create lysosomes. Lysosomes digest macromolecules, recycle worn-out organelles, and destroy pathogens.

4.5 The Cytoskeleton

The cytoskeleton has three different protein element types. From narrowest to widest, they are the microfilaments (actin filaments), intermediate filaments, and microtubules.

Biologists often associate microfilaments with myosin. They provide rigidity and shape to the cell and facilitate cellular movements. Intermediate filaments bear tension and anchor the nucleus and other organelles in place. Microtubules help the cell resist compression, serve as tracks for motor proteins that move vesicles through the cell, and pull replicated chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing cell. They are also the structural element of centrioles, flagella, and cilia.

4.6 Connections between Cells and Cellular Activities

Animal cells communicate via their extracellular matrices and are connected to each other via tight junctions, desmosomes, and gap junctions. Plant cells are connected and communicate with each other via plasmodesmata.

When protein receptors on the plasma membrane's surface of an animal cell bind to a substance in the extracellular matrix, a chain of reactions begins that changes activities taking place within the cell. Plasmodesmata are channels between adjacent plant cells, while gap junctions are channels between adjacent animal cells. However, their structures are quite different. A tight junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent cells, while a desmosome acts like a spot weld.

VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS

1. Figure 4.7 Prokaryotic cells are much smaller than eukaryotic cells. What advantages might small cell size confer on a cell? What advantages might large cell size have?

2. Figure 4.8 If the nucleolus were not able to carry out its function, what other cellular organelles would be affected?   
3. Figure 4.18 If a peripheral membrane protein were synthesized in the lumen (inside) of the ER, would it end up on the inside or outside of the plasma membrane?

REVIEW QUESTIONS

4. When viewing a specimen through a light microscope, scientists use to distinguish the individual components of cells.

a. a beam of electrons b. radioactive isotopes c. special stains d. high temperatures

5. The is the basic unit of life.

a. organism b. cell c. tissue d. organ

6. Prokaryotes depend on to obtain some materials and to get rid of wastes.

a. ribosomes b. flagella c. cell division d. diffusion

7. Bacteria that lack fimbriae are less likely to a. adhere to cell surfaces b. swim through bodily fluids c. synthesize proteins d. retain the ability to divide

8. Which of the following organisms is a prokaryote?

a. amoeba   
b. influenza A virus c. charophyte algae d. E.coli

9. Which of the following is surrounded by two phospholipid bilayers?

a. the ribosomes b. the vesicles c. the cytoplasm d. the nucleoplasm

10. Peroxisomes got their name because hydrogen peroxide is:

a. used in their detoxification reactions b. produced during their oxidation reactions c. incorporated into their membranes d. a cofactor for the organelles’ enzymes

11. In plant cells, the function of the lysosomes is carried out by

a. vacuoles b. peroxisomes c. ribosomes d. nuclei

12. Which of the following is both in eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells?

a. nucleus   
b. mitochondrion   
c. vacuole   
d. ribosomes

13. Tay-Sachs disease is a genetic disorder that results in the destruction of neurons due to a buildup of sphingolipids in the cells. Which organelle is malfunctioning in TaySachs?

a. lysosome   
b. endoplasmic reticulum   
c. peroxisome   
d. mitochondria

14. Which of the following is not a component of the endomembrane system?

a. mitochondrion b. Golgi apparatus c. endoplasmic reticulum d. lysosome

15. The process by which a cell engulfs a foreign particle is known as:

a. endosymbiosis b. phagocytosis c. hydrolysis d. membrane synthesis

16. Which of the following is most likely to have the greatest concentration of smooth endoplasmic reticulum?

a. a cell that secretes enzymes b. a cell that destroys pathogens c. a cell that makes steroid hormones d. a cell that engages in photosynthesis

17. Which of the following sequences correctly lists in order the steps involved in the incorporation of a proteinaceous molecule within a cell?

a. protein synthesis of the protein on the ribosome; modification in the Golgi apparatus; packaging in the endoplasmic reticulum; tagging in the vesicle   
b. synthesis of the protein on the lysosome; tagging in the Golgi; packaging in the vesicle; distribution in the endoplasmic reticulum   
c. synthesis of the protein on the ribosome; modification in the endoplasmic reticulum; tagging in the Golgi; distribution via the vesicle   
d. synthesis of the protein on the lysosome; packaging in the vesicle; distribution via the Golgi; tagging in the endoplasmic reticulum

18. Congenital disorders of glycosylation are a growing class of rare diseases. Which organelle would be most commonly involved in the glycoprotein disorder portion of the group?

a. RER b. ribosomes c. endosomes d. Golgi apparatus

19. Which of the following have the ability to disassemble and reform quickly?

a. microfilaments and intermediate filaments b. microfilaments and microtubules c. intermediate filaments and microtubules d. only intermediate filaments

20. Which of the following do not play a role in intracellular movement?

a. microfilaments and intermediate filaments b. microfilaments and microtubules c. intermediate filaments and microtubules d. only intermediate filaments

21. In humans, are used to move a cell within its environment while are used to move the environment relative to the cell.

a. cilia, pseudopodia b. flagella; cilia c. microtubules; flagella d. microfilaments; microtubules

22. Which of the following are only in plant cells?

a. gap junctions b. desmosomes c. plasmodesmata d. tight junctions

23. The key components of desmosomes are cadherins and

a. actin b. microfilaments c. intermediate filaments d. microtubules

24. Diseased animal cells may produce molecules that activate death cascades to kill the cells in a controlled manner. Why would neighboring healthy cells also die?

a. The death molecule is passed through desmosomes.   
b. The death molecule is passed through plasmodesmata.   
c. The death molecule disrupts the extracellular matrix.   
d. The death molecule passes through gap junctions.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

25. In your everyday life, you have probably noticed that certain instruments are ideal for certain situations. For example, you would use a spoon rather than a fork to eat soup because a spoon is shaped for scooping, while soup would slip between the tines of a fork. The use of ideal instruments also applies in science. In what situation(s) would the use of a light microscope be ideal, and why?   
26. In what situation(s) would the use of a scanning electron microscope be ideal, and why?   
27. In what situation(s) would a transmission electron microscope be ideal, and why?   
28. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each of these types of microscopes?   
29. Explain how the formation of an adult human follows the cell theory.   
30. Antibiotics are medicines that are used to fight bacterial infections. These medicines kill prokaryotic cells without harming human cells. What part or parts of the bacterial cell do you think antibiotics target? Why?   
31. Explain why not all microbes are harmful.   
32. You already know that ribosomes are abundant in red blood cells. In what other cells of the body would you find them in great abundance? Why?   
33. What are the structural and functional similarities and differences between mitochondria and chloroplasts?   
34. Why are plasma membranes arranged as a bilayer rathe than a monolayer?   
35. In the context of cell biology, what do we mean by form follows function? What are at least two examples of this concept?   
36. In your opinion, is the nuclear membrane part of the endomembrane system? Why or why not? Defend your answer.   
37. What are the similarities and differences between the structures of centrioles and flagella?   
38. How do cilia and flagella differ?   
39. Describe how microfilaments and microtubules are involved in the phagocytosis and destruction of a pathogen by a macrophage.   
40. Compare and contrast the boundaries that plant, animal, and bacteria cells use to separate themselves from their surrounding environment.   
41. How does the structure of a plasmodesma differ from that of a gap junction?   
42. Explain how the extracellular matrix functions.   
43. Pathogenic E.colihave recently been shown to degrade tight junction proteins during infection. How would this provide an advantage to the bacteria?