57.8 Summary
Distributed systems are critical to modern computing, but are difficult to secure. The cornerstone of providing distributed system security tends to be ensuring that the insecure network connecting system components does not introduce new security problems. Messages sent between the components are encrypted and authenticated, protecting their privacy and integrity, and offering exclusive access to the distributed service to the intended users. Standard tools like SSL/TLS and public keys distributed through X.509 certificates are used to provide these security services. Passwords are often used to authenticate remote human users.  
Symmetric cryptography is used for transport of most data, since it is cheaper than asymmetric cryptography. Often, symmetric keys are not shared by system participants before the communication starts, so the first step in the protocol is typically exchanging a symmetric key. As discussed in previous chapters, key secrecy is critical in proper use of cryptography, so care is required in the key distribution process. DiffieHellman key exchange is commonly used, but it still requires authentication to ensure that only the intended participants know the key.  
As mentioned in earlier chapters, building your own cryptographic solutions is challenging and often leads to security failures. A variety of tools, including SSL/TLS, SSH, and HTTPS, have already tackled many of the challenging problems and made good progress in overcoming them. These tools can be used to build other systems, avoiding many of the pitfalls of building cryptography from scratch. However, proper use of even the best security tools depends on an understanding of the tool’s purpose and limitations, so developing deeper knowledge of the way such tools can be integrated into one’s system is vital to using them to their best advantage.  
Remember that these tools only make limited security guarantees. They do not provide the same assurance that an operating system gets when it performs actions locally on hardware under its direct control. Thus, even when using good authentication and encryption tools properly, a system designer is well advised to think carefully about the implications of performing actions requested by a remote site, or providing sensitive information to that site. What happens beyond the boundary of the machine the OS controls is always uncertain and thus risky.  