21.6 Biological Effects of Radiation

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the biological impact of ionizing radiation • Define units for measuring radiation exposure • Explain the operation of common tools for detecting radioactivity • List common sources of radiation exposure in the US

The increased use of radioisotopes has led to increased concerns over the effects of these materials on biological systems (such as humans). All radioactive nuclides emit high-energy particles or electromagnetic waves. When this radiation encounters living cells, it can cause heating, break chemical bonds, or ionize molecules. The most serious biological damage results when these radioactive emissions fragment or ionize molecules. For example, alpha and beta particles emitted from nuclear decay reactions possess much higher energies than ordinary chemical bond energies. When these particles strike and penetrate matter, they produce ions and molecular fragments that are extremely reactive. The damage this does to biomolecules in living organisms can cause serious malfunctions in normal cell processes, taxing the organism’s repair mechanisms and possibly causing illness or even death (Figure 21.30).

Ionizing and Nonionizing Radiation

There is a large difference in the magnitude of the biological effects of nonionizing radiation (for example, light and microwaves) and ionizing radiation, emissions energetic enough to knock electrons out of molecules (for example,  and  particles, γ rays, X-rays, and high-energy ultraviolet radiation) (Figure 21.31).

Energy absorbed from nonionizing radiation speeds up the movement of atoms and molecules, which is equivalent to heating the sample. Although biological systems are sensitive to heat (as we might know from touching a hot stove or spending a day at the beach in the sun), a large amount of nonionizing radiation is necessary before dangerous levels are reached. Ionizing radiation, however, may cause much more severe damage by breaking bonds or removing electrons in biological molecules, disrupting their structure and function. The damage can also be done indirectly, by first ionizing  (the most abundant molecule in living organisms), which forms a  ion that reacts with water, forming a hydronium ion and a hydroxyl radical:

e  radiation HO++ HO 丨V HO++ OH·

Because the hydroxyl radical has an unpaired electron, it is highly reactive. (This is true of any substance with unpaired electrons, known as a free radical.) This hydroxyl radical can react with all kinds of biological molecules (DNA, proteins, enzymes, and so on), causing damage to the molecules and disrupting physiological processes. Examples of direct and indirect damage are shown in Figure 21.32.

causing damage indirectly.

Biological Effects of Exposure to Radiation

Radiation can harm either the whole body (somatic damage) or eggs and sperm (genetic damage). Its effects are more pronounced in cells that reproduce rapidly, such as the stomach lining, hair follicles, bone marrow, and embryos. This is why patients undergoing radiation therapy often feel nauseous or sick to their stomach, lose hair, have bone aches, and so on, and why particular care must be taken when undergoing radiation therapy during pregnancy.

Different types of radiation have differing abilities to pass through material (Figure 21.33). A very thin barrier, such as a sheet or two of paper, or the top layer of skin cells, usually stops alpha particles. Because of this, alpha particle sources are usually not dangerous if outside the body, but are quite hazardous if ingested or inhaled (see the Chemistry in Everyday Life feature on Radon Exposure). Beta particles will pass through a hand, or a thin layer of material like paper or wood, but are stopped by a thin layer of metal. Gamma radiation is very penetrating and can pass through a thick layer of most materials. Some high-energy gamma radiation is able to pass through a few feet of concrete. Certain dense, high atomic number elements (such as lead) can effectively attenuate gamma radiation with thinner material and are used for shielding. The ability of various kinds of emissions to cause ionization varies greatly, and some particles have almost no tendency to produce ionization. Alpha particles have about twice the ionizing power of fast-moving neutrons, about 10 times that of  particles, and about 20 times that of γ rays and X-rays.

Chemistry in Everyday Life

Radon Exposure

For many people, one of the largest sources of exposure to radiation is from radon gas (Rn-222). Radon-222 is an α emitter with a half–life of 3.82 days. It is one of the products of the radioactive decay series of U-238 (Figure 21.9), which is found in trace amounts in soil and rocks. The radon gas that is produced slowly escapes from the ground and gradually seeps into homes and other structures above. Since it is about eight times more dense than air, radon gas accumulates in basements and lower floors, and slowly diffuses throughout buildings (Figure 21.34).

Radon is found in buildings across the country, with amounts depending on where you live. The average concentration of radon inside houses in the US  is about three times the levels found in outside air, and about one in six houses have radon levels high enough that remediation efforts to reduce the radon concentration are recommended. Exposure to radon increases one’s risk of getting cancer (especially lung cancer), and high radon levels can be as bad for health as smoking a carton of cigarettes a day. Radon is the number one cause of lung cancer in nonsmokers and the second leading cause of lung cancer overall. Radon exposure is believed to cause over 20,000 deaths in the US per year.

Measuring Radiation Exposure

Several different devices are used to detect and measure radiation, including Geiger counters, scintillation counters (scintillators), and radiation dosimeters (Figure 21.35). Probably the best-known radiation instrument, the Geiger counter (also called the Geiger-Müller counter) detects and measures radiation. Radiation causes the ionization of the gas in a Geiger-Müller tube. The rate of ionization is proportional to the amount of radiation. A scintillation counter contains a scintillator—a material that emits light (luminesces) when excited by ionizing radiation—and a sensor that converts the light into an electric signal. Radiation dosimeters also measure ionizing radiation and are often used to determine personal radiation exposure. Commonly used types are electronic, film badge, thermoluminescent, and quartz fiber dosimeters.

A variety of units are used to measure various aspects of radiation (Figure 21.36). The SI unit for rate of radioactive decay is the becquerel  , with  disintegration per second. The curie (Ci) and millicurie (mCi) are much larger units and are frequently used in medicine (1 curie   disintegrations per second). The SI unit for measuring radiation dose is the gray (Gy), with  of energy absorbed per kilogram of tissue. In medical applications, the radiation absorbed dose (rad) is more often used  Gy; 1 rad results in the absorption of  of tissue). The SI unit measuring tissue damage caused by radiation is the sievert (Sv). This takes into account both the energy and the biological effects of the type of radiation involved in the radiation dose. The roentgen equivalent for man (rem) is the unit for radiation damage that is used most frequently in medicine (  Sv). Note that the tissue damage units (rem or Sv) includes the energy of the radiation dose (rad or Gy) along with a biological factor referred to as the RBE (for relative biological effectiveness) that is an approximate measure of the relative damage done by the radiation. These are related by:

with RBE approximately 10 for  radiation,  for protons and neutrons, and 1 for  and  radiation

Units of Radiation Measurement

Table 21.4 summarizes the units used for measuring radiation.

EXAMPLE 21.8

Amount of Radiation

Cobalt-60  ) is used in cancer therapy since the γ rays it emits can be focused in small areas where the cancer is located. A 5.00-g sample of Co-60 is available for cancer treatment.

(a) What is its activity in Bq? (b) What is its activity in Ci?

Solution

The activity is given by:

And to convert this to decays per second:

(a) Since  the activity in Becquerel (Bq) is:

(b) Since  the activity in curie (Ci) is:

Check Your Learning

Tritium is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen  that has several uses, including self-powered lighting, in which electrons emitted in tritium radioactive decay cause phosphorus to glow. Its nucleus contains one proton and two neutrons, and the atomic mass of tritium is 3.016 amu. What is the activity of a sample containing  of tritium (a) in Bq and (b) in Ci?

Answer:

(a)  Bq; (b) 0.962 Ci

Effects of Long-term Radiation Exposure on the Human Body

The effects of radiation depend on the type, energy, and location of the radiation source, and the length of exposure. As shown in Figure 21.37, the average person is exposed to background radiation, including cosmic rays from the sun and radon from uranium in the ground (see the Chemistry in Everyday Life feature on Radon Exposure); radiation from medical exposure, including CAT scans, radioisotope tests, X-rays, and so on; and small amounts of radiation from other human activities, such as airplane flights (which are bombarded by increased numbers of cosmic rays in the upper atmosphere), radioactivity from consumer products, and a variety of radionuclides that enter our bodies when we breathe (for example, carbon-14) or through the food chain (for example, potassium-40, strontium-90, and iodine-131).

A short-term, sudden dose of a large amount of radiation can cause a wide range of health effects, from changes in blood chemistry to death. Short-term exposure to tens of rems of radiation will likely cause very noticeable symptoms or illness; a dose of about 500 rems is estimated to have a  probability of causing the death of the victim within 30 days of exposure. Exposure to radioactive emissions has a cumulative effect on the body during a person’s lifetime, which is another reason why it is important to avoid any unnecessary exposure to radiation. Health effects of short-term exposure to radiation are shown in Table 21.5.

Health Effects of Radiation

It is impossible to avoid some exposure to ionizing radiation. We are constantly exposed to background radiation from a variety of natural sources, including cosmic radiation, rocks, medical procedures, consumer products, and even our own atoms. We can minimize our exposure by blocking or shielding the radiation, moving farther from the source, and limiting the time of exposure.

Key Terms

alpha  decay loss of an alpha particle during radioactive decay   
alpha particle  high-energy helium nucleus; a helium atom that has lost two electrons and contains two protons and two neutrons   
antimatter particles with the same mass but opposite properties (such as charge) of ordinary particles   
band of stability (also, belt of stability, zone of stability, or valley of stability) region of graph of number of protons versus number of neutrons containing stable (nonradioactive) nuclides   
becquerel (Bq) SI unit for rate of radioactive decay;  disintegration/s   
beta (β) decay breakdown of a neutron into a proton, which remains in the nucleus, and an electron, which is emitted as a beta particle   
beta particle  high-energy electron   
binding energy per nucleon total binding energy for the nucleus divided by the number of nucleons in the nucleus   
chain reaction repeated fission caused when the neutrons released in fission bombard other atoms   
chemotherapy similar to internal radiation therapy, but chemical rather than radioactive substances are introduced into the body to kill cancer cells   
containment system (also, shield) a three-part structure of materials that protects the exterior of a nuclear fission reactor and operating personnel from the high temperatures, pressures, and radiation levels inside the reactor   
control rod material inserted into the fuel assembly that absorbs neutrons and can be raised or lowered to adjust the rate of a fission reaction   
critical mass amount of fissionable material that will support a self-sustaining (nuclear fission) chain reaction   
curie (Ci) larger unit for rate of radioactive decay frequently used in medicine;  disintegrations/s   
daughter nuclide nuclide produced by the radioactive decay of another nuclide; may be stable or may decay further   
electron capture combination of a core electron with a proton to yield a neutron within the nucleus   
electron volt (eV) measurement unit of nuclear binding energies, with 1 eV equaling the amount energy due to the moving an electron across an electric potential difference of 1 volt   
external beam radiation therapy radiation delivered by a machine outside the body   
fissile (or fissionable) when a material is capable of sustaining a nuclear fission reaction   
fission splitting of a heavier nucleus into two or more lighter nuclei, usually accompanied by the conversion of mass into large amounts of energy   
fusion combination of very light nuclei into heavier nuclei, accompanied by the conversion of mass into large amounts of energy   
fusion reactor nuclear reactor in which fusion reactions of light nuclei are controlled   
gamma (γ) emission decay of an excited-state nuclide accompanied by emission of a gamma ray   
gamma ray  short wavelength, highenergy electromagnetic radiation that exhibits wave-particle duality   
Geiger counter instrument that detects and measures radiation via the ionization produced in a Geiger-Müller tube   
gray (Gy) SI unit for measuring radiation dose; 1  absorbed/kg tissue   
half-life  time required for half of the atoms in a radioactive sample to decay   
internal radiation therapy (also, brachytherapy) radiation from a radioactive substance introduced into the body to kill cancer cells   
ionizing radiation radiation that can cause a molecule to lose an electron and form an ion   
magic number nuclei with specific numbers of nucleons that are within the band of stability   
mass defect difference between the mass of an atom and the summed mass of its constituent subatomic particles (or the mass “lost” when nucleons are brought together to form a nucleus)   
mass-energy equivalence equation Albert Einstein’s relationship showing that mass and energy are equivalent   
millicurie (mCi) larger unit for rate of radioactive decay frequently used in medicine;   disintegrations/s   
nonionizing radiation radiation that speeds up the movement of atoms and molecules; it is equivalent to heating a sample, but is not energetic enough to cause the ionization of molecules   
nuclear binding energy energy lost when an

atom’s nucleons are bound together (or the energy needed to break a nucleus into its constituent protons and neutrons) nuclear chemistry study of the structure of atomic nuclei and processes that change nuclear structure nuclear fuel fissionable isotope present in sufficient quantities to provide a self-sustaining chain reaction in a nuclear reactor nuclear moderator substance that slows neutrons to a speed low enough to cause fission nuclear reaction change to a nucleus resulting in changes in the atomic number, mass number, or energy state nuclear reactor environment that produces energy via nuclear fission in which the chain reaction is controlled and sustained without explosion nuclear transmutation conversion of one nuclide into another nuclide nucleon collective term for protons and neutrons in a nucleus nuclide nucleus of a particular isotope parent nuclide unstable nuclide that changes spontaneously into another (daughter) nuclide particle accelerator device that uses electric and magnetic fields to increase the kinetic energy of nuclei used in transmutation reactions positron  antiparticle to the electron; it has identical properties to an electron, except for having the opposite (positive) charge positron emission (also,  decay) conversion of a proton into a neutron, which remains in the nucleus, and a positron, which is emitted radiation absorbed dose (rad) SI unit for measuring radiation dose, frequently used in medical applications;  Gy radiation dosimeter device that measures ionizing radiation and is used to determine personal radiation exposure radiation therapy use of high-energy radiation to damage the DNA of cancer cells, which kills them or keeps them from dividing radioactive decay spontaneous decay of an unstable nuclide into another nuclide radioactive decay series chains of successive disintegrations (radioactive decays) that ultimately lead to a stable end-product radioactive tracer (also, radioactive label)

radioisotope used to track or follow a substance by monitoring its radioactive emissions   
radioactivity phenomenon exhibited by an unstable nucleon that spontaneously undergoes change into a nucleon that is more stable; an unstable nucleon is said to be radioactive   
radiocarbon dating highly accurate means of dating objects 30,000–50,000 years old that were derived from once-living matter; achieved by calculating the ratio of  in the object vs. the ratio of  in the present-day atmosphere   
radioisotope isotope that is unstable and undergoes conversion into a different, more stable isotope   
radiometric dating use of radioisotopes and their properties to date the formation of objects such as archeological artifacts, formerly living organisms, or geological formations   
reactor coolant assembly used to carry the heat produced by fission in a reactor to an external boiler and turbine where it is transformed into electricity   
relative biological effectiveness (RBE) measure of the relative damage done by radiation   
roentgen equivalent man (rem) unit for radiation damage, frequently used in medicine;  1 Sv   
scintillation counter instrument that uses a scintillator—a material that emits light when excited by ionizing radiation—to detect and measure radiation   
sievert (Sv) SI unit measuring tissue damage caused by radiation; takes into account energy and biological effects of radiation   
strong nuclear force force of attraction between nucleons that holds a nucleus together   
subcritical mass amount of fissionable material that cannot sustain a chain reaction; less than a critical mass   
supercritical mass amount of material in which there is an increasing rate of fission   
transmutation reaction bombardment of one type of nuclei with other nuclei or neutrons   
transuranium element element with an atomic number greater than 92; these elements do not occur in nature

Key Equations

decay rate  

Summary

21.1 Nuclear Structure and Stability

An atomic nucleus consists of protons and neutrons, collectively called nucleons. Although protons repel each other, the nucleus is held tightly together by a short-range, but very strong, force called the strong nuclear force. A nucleus has less mass than the total mass of its constituent nucleons. This “missing” mass is the mass defect, which has been converted into the binding energy that holds the nucleus together according to Einstein’s mass-energy equivalence equation,  . Of the many nuclides that exist, only a small number are stable. Nuclides with even numbers of protons or neutrons, or those with magic numbers of nucleons, are especially likely to be stable. These stable nuclides occupy a narrow band of stability on a graph of number of protons versus number of neutrons. The binding energy per nucleon is largest for the elements with mass numbers near 56; these are the most stable nuclei.

21.2 Nuclear Equations

Nuclei can undergo reactions that change their number of protons, number of neutrons, or energy state. Many different particles can be involved in nuclear reactions. The most common are protons, neutrons, positrons (which are positively charged electrons), alpha (α) particles (which are highenergy helium nuclei), beta (β) particles (which are high-energy electrons), and gamma (γ) rays (which compose high-energy electromagnetic radiation). As with chemical reactions, nuclear reactions are always balanced. When a nuclear reaction occurs, the total mass (number) and the total charge remain unchanged.

21.3 Radioactive Decay

Nuclei that have unstable n:p ratios undergo spontaneous radioactive decay. The most common types of radioactivity are  decay,  decay, γ emission, positron emission, and electron capture. Nuclear reactions also often involve  rays, and some nuclei decay by electron capture. Each of these modes of decay leads to the formation of a new nucleus with a more stable n:p ratio. Some

substances undergo radioactive decay series, proceeding through multiple decays before ending in a stable isotope. All nuclear decay processes follow first-order kinetics, and each radioisotope has its own characteristic half-life, the time that is required for half of its atoms to decay. Because of the large differences in stability among nuclides, there is a very wide range of half-lives of radioactive substances. Many of these substances have found useful applications in medical diagnosis and treatment, determining the age of archaeological and geological objects, and more.

21.4 Transmutation and Nuclear Energy

It is possible to produce new atoms by bombarding other atoms with nuclei or high-speed particles. The products of these transmutation reactions can be stable or radioactive. A number of artificial elements, including technetium, astatine, and the transuranium elements, have been produced in this way.

Nuclear power as well as nuclear weapon detonations can be generated through fission (reactions in which a heavy nucleus is split into two or more lighter nuclei and several neutrons). Because the neutrons may induce additional fission reactions when they combine with other heavy nuclei, a chain reaction can result. Useful power is obtained if the fission process is carried out in a nuclear reactor. The conversion of light nuclei into heavier nuclei (fusion) also produces energy. At present, this energy has not been contained adequately and is too expensive to be feasible for commercial energy production.

21.5 Uses of Radioisotopes

Compounds known as radioactive tracers can be used to follow reactions, track the distribution of a substance, diagnose and treat medical conditions, and much more. Other radioactive substances are helpful for controlling pests, visualizing structures, providing fire warnings, and for many other applications. Hundreds of millions of nuclear medicine tests and procedures, using a wide variety of radioisotopes with relatively short half-lives, are performed every year in the US. Most of these radioisotopes have relatively short half-lives; some are short enough that the radioisotope must be made on-site at medical facilities. Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation to kill cancer cells by damaging their DNA. The radiation used for this treatment may be delivered externally or internally.

21.6 Biological Effects of Radiation

We are constantly exposed to radiation from a variety of naturally occurring and human-produced sources. This radiation can affect living organisms. Ionizing radiation is the most harmful because it can ionize molecules or break chemical bonds, which damages the molecule and causes malfunctions in cell processes. It can also create reactive hydroxyl radicals that damage biological molecules and disrupt physiological processes. Radiation can cause somatic or genetic damage, and is most harmful to

rapidly reproducing cells. Types of radiation differ in their ability to penetrate material and damage tissue, with alpha particles the least penetrating but potentially most damaging and gamma rays the most penetrating.

Various devices, including Geiger counters, scintillators, and dosimeters, are used to detect and measure radiation, and monitor radiation exposure. We use several units to measure radiation: becquerels or curies for rates of radioactive decay; gray or rads for energy absorbed; and rems or sieverts for biological effects of radiation. Exposure to radiation can cause a wide range of health effects, from minor to severe, and including death. We can minimize the effects of radiation by shielding with dense materials such as lead, moving away from the source, and limiting time of exposure.

Exercises

21.1 Nuclear Structure and Stability

1. Write the following isotopes in hyphenated form (e.g., “carbon-14”)

(a)  (b) Al (c) Kr (d) 77

2. Write the following isotopes in nuclide notation (e.g., 

(a) oxygen-14   
(b) copper-70   
(c) tantalum-175   
(d) francium-217

3. For the following isotopes that have missing information, fill in the missing information to complete the notation

(ab)   (c) (d)  X 56

4. For each of the isotopes in Exercise 21.1, determine the numbers of protons, neutrons, and electrons in a neutral atom of the isotope.

5. Write the nuclide notation, including charge if applicable, for atoms with the following characteristics:

(a) 25 protons, 20 neutrons, 24 electrons (b) 45 protons, 24 neutrons, 43 electrons (c) 53 protons, 89 neutrons, 54 electrons (d) 97 protons, 146 neutrons, 97 electrons

6. Calculate the density of the  nucleus in  , assuming that it has the typical nuclear diameter of   cm and is spherical in shape.

7. What are the two principal differences between nuclear reactions and ordinary chemical changes?

8. The mass of the atom  is 22.9898 amu.

(a) Calculate its binding energy per atom in millions of electron volts.   
(b) Calculate its binding energy per nucleon.

9. Which of the following nuclei lie within the band of stability shown in Figure 21.2?

(a) chlorine-37   
(b) calcium-40   
(c)    
(d)    
(e)    
(f )    
(g)    
(h) carbon-14

10. Which of the following nuclei lie within the band of stability shown in Figure 21.2?

(a) argon-40   
(b) oxygen-16   
(c)    
(d)    
(e)    
(f )    
(g)    
(h) magnesium-24

21.2 Nuclear Equations

11. Write a brief description or definition of each of the following:

(a) nucleon   
(b)  particle   
(c)  particle   
(d) positron   
(e) γ ray   
(f ) nuclide   
(g) mass number   
(h) atomic number

12. Which of the various particles (  particles,  particles, and so on) that may be produced in a nuclear reaction are actually nuclei?

13. Complete each of the following equations by adding the missing species: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

14. Complete each of the following equations: (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

15. Write a balanced equation for each of the following nuclear reactions:

(a) the production of  from  by  particle bombardment (b) the production of  from  by neutron bombardment (c) the production of  from  by neutron bombardment (d) the production of  from  by  bombardment

16. Technetium-99 is prepared from  . Molybdenum-98 combines with a neutron to give molybdenum-99, an unstable isotope that emits a  particle to yield an excited form of technetium-99, represented as  . This excited nucleus relaxes to the ground state, represented as  , by emitting a γ ray. The ground state of  then emits a  particle. Write the equations for each of these nuclear reactions.

17. The mass of the atom is 18.99840 amu. (a) Calculate its binding energy per atom in millions of electron volts. (b) Calculate its binding energy per nucleon.

18. For the reaction  if  of carbon reacts, what volume of nitrogen gas  is produced at 273K and 1 atm?

21.3 Radioactive Decay

19. What are the types of radiation emitted by the nuclei of radioactive elements?

20. What changes occur to the atomic number and mass of a nucleus during each of the following decay scenarios?

(a) an  particle is emitted (b) a  particle is emitted (c)  radiation is emitted (d) a positron is emitted (e) an electron is captured

21. What is the change in the nucleus that results from the following decay scenarios? (a) emission of a  particle (b) emission of a  particle (c) capture of an electron

22. Many nuclides with atomic numbers greater than 83 decay by processes such as electron emission. Explain the observation that the emissions from these unstable nuclides also normally include  particles.

23. Why is electron capture accompanied by the emission of an X-ray?

24. Explain, in terms of Figure 21.2, how unstable heavy nuclides (atomic number  ) may decompose to form nuclides of greater stability (a) if they are below the band of stability and (b) if they are above the band of stability.

25. Which of the following nuclei is most likely to decay by positron emission? Explain your choice. (a) chromium-53 (b) manganese-51 (c) iron-59

(a)  (b)  (c)  (d) H (e) 244 Pu

27. The following nuclei do not lie in the band of stability. How would they be expected to decay?

(a)  (b) U (c)  (d) Li (e) 45Cm

28. Predict by what mode(s) of spontaneous radioactive decay each of the following unstable isotopes might proceed:

(a)(b)(c)(d)     (e)  (f )  (g) 

29. Write a nuclear reaction for each step in the formation of  from  which proceeds by a series of decay reactions involving the step-wise emission of  , β,  ,  ,  ,  particles, in that order.

30. Write a nuclear reaction for each step in the formation of  from  which proceeds by a series of decay reactions involving the step-wise emission of  particles, in that order.

31. Define the term half-life and illustrate it with an example.

32. A  -g sample of nobelium,  has a half-life of 55 seconds after it is formed. What is the percentage of  remaining at the following times? (a)  after it forms (b)  after it forms

33.  is a nuclear waste byproduct with a half-life of 24,000 y. What fraction of the  present today will be present in 1000 y?

34. The isotope  undergoes  decay with a half-life of 3.1 min. (a) What isotope is produced by the decay? (b) How long will it take for  of a sample of pure  to decay? (c) What percentage of a sample of pure  remains un-decayed after 

35. If  of  produces  of the gas  at STP (standard temperature and pressure) in  , what is the half-life of  in years?

36. The isotope  is one of the extremely hazardous species in the residues from nuclear power generation. The strontium in a 0.500-g sample diminishes to  in 10.0 y. Calculate the half-life.

37. Technetium-99 is often used for assessing heart, liver, and lung damage because certain technetium compounds are absorbed by damaged tissues. It has a half-life of  . Calculate the rate constant for the decay of 

38. What is the age of mummified primate skin that contains  of the original quantity of 

39. A sample of rock was found to contain  of rubidium-87 and  of strontium-87. (a) Calculate the age of the rock if the half-life of the decay of rubidium by  emission is  (b) If some  was initially present in the rock, would the rock be younger, older, or the same age as the age calculated in (a)? Explain your answer.

40. A laboratory investigation shows that a sample of uranium ore contains  of  and  of  Calculate the age of the ore. The half-life of  is  yr.

41. Plutonium was detected in trace amounts in natural uranium deposits by Glenn Seaborg and his associates in 1941. They proposed that the source of this  was the capture of neutrons by  nuclei. Why is this plutonium not likely to have been trapped at the time the solar system formed  years ago?

42. A  atom  u) decays into a  atom  mu) by electron capture. How much energy (in millions of electron volts, MeV) is produced by this reaction?

43.  atom  amu) decays into a  atom  u) by loss of a  particle (mass  ) or by electron capture. How much energy (in millions of electron volts) is produced by this reaction?

44. Isotopes such as  (half-life:  years) are believed to have been present in our solar system as it formed, but have since decayed and are now called extinct nuclides. (a)  decays by  emission or electron capture. Write the equations for these two nuclear transformations. (b) The earth was formed about  (4.7 billion) years ago. How old was the earth when 99.999999% of the  originally present had decayed?

45. Write a balanced equation for each of the following nuclear reactions:

(a) bismuth-212 decays into polonium-212   
(b) beryllium-8 and a positron are produced by the decay of an unstable nucleus   
(c) neptunium-239 forms from the reaction of uranium-238 with a neutron and then spontaneously   
converts into plutonium-239   
(d) strontium-90 decays into yttrium-90

46. Write a balanced equation for each of the following nuclear reactions: (a) mercury-180 decays into platinum-176 (b) zirconium-90 and an electron are produced by the decay of an unstable nucleus (c) thorium-232 decays and produces an alpha particle and a radium-228 nucleus, which decays into actinium-228 by beta decay (d) neon-19 decays into fluorine-19

21.4 Transmutation and Nuclear Energy

47. Write the balanced nuclear equation for the production of the following transuranium elements:

(a) berkelium-244, made by the reaction of Am-241 and He-4 (b) fermium-254, made by the reaction of Pu-239 with a large number of neutrons (c) lawrencium-257, made by the reaction of Cf-250 and B-11 (d) dubnium-260, made by the reaction of Cf-249 and N-15

48. How does nuclear fission differ from nuclear fusion? Why are both of these processes exothermic?

49. Both fusion and fission are nuclear reactions. Why is a very high temperature required for fusion, but not for fission?   
50. Cite the conditions necessary for a nuclear chain reaction to take place. Explain how it can be controlled to produce energy, but not produce an explosion.   
51. Describe the components of a nuclear reactor.   
52. In usual practice, both a moderator and control rods are necessary to operate a nuclear chain reaction safely for the purpose of energy production. Cite the function of each and explain why both are necessary.   
53. Describe how the potential energy of uranium is converted into electrical energy in a nuclear power plant.   
54. The mass of a hydrogen atom  is 1.007825 amu; that of a tritium atom  is 3.01605 amu; and that of an  particle is 4.00150 amu. How much energy in kilojoules per mole of  produced is released by the following fusion reaction: 

21.5 Uses of Radioisotopes

55. How can a radioactive nuclide be used to show that the equilibrium:  is a dynamic equilibrium?

56. Technetium-  has a half-life of 6.01 hours. If a patient injected with technetium-  is safe to leave the hospital once  of the dose has decayed, when is the patient allowed to leave?

57. Iodine that enters the body is stored in the thyroid gland from which it is released to control growth and metabolism. The thyroid can be imaged if iodine-131 is injected into the body. In larger doses, I-133 is also used as a means of treating cancer of the thyroid. I-131 has a half-life of 8.70 days and decays by  emission.

(a) Write an equation for the decay. (b) How long will it take for  of a dose of I-131 to decay?

21.6 Biological Effects of Radiation

58. If a hospital were storing radioisotopes, what is the minimum containment needed to protect against: (a) cobalt-60 (a strong γ emitter used for irradiation) (b) molybdenum-99 (a beta emitter used to produce technetium-99 for imaging)   
59. Based on what is known about Radon-222’s primary decay method, why is inhalation so dangerous?   
60. Given specimens uranium-232  ) and uranium-233  of equal mass, which one would have greater activity and why?   
61. A scientist is studying a  sample of thorium-229  in a laboratory. (a) What is its activity in Bq? (b) What is its activity in Ci?   
62. Given specimens neon-24  and bismuth-211  ) of equal mass, which one would have greater activity and why?

The Periodic Table

Essential Mathematics

Exponential Arithmetic

Exponential notation is used to express very large and very small numbers as a product of two numbers. The first number of the product, the digitterm, is usually a number not less than 1 and not equal to or greater than 10. The second number of the product, the exponentialterm, is written as 10 with an exponent. Some examples of exponential notation are:

The power (exponent) of 10 is equal to the number of places the decimal is shifted to give the digit number. The exponential method is particularly useful notation for very large and very small numbers. For example,  , and  .

Addition of Exponentials

Convert all numbers to the same power of 10, add the digit terms of the numbers, and if appropriate, convert the digit term back to a number between 1 and 10 by adjusting the exponential term.

EXAMPLE B1

Adding Exponentials

Add  and  .

Solution

Subtraction of Exponentials

Convert all numbers to the same power of 10, take the difference of the digit terms, and if appropriate, convert the digit term back to a number between 1 and 10 by adjusting the exponential term.

EXAMPLE B2

Subtracting Exponentials

Subtract  from  .

Solution

Multiplication of Exponentials

Multiply the digit terms in the usual way and add the exponents of the exponential terms.

EXAMPLE B3

Multiplying Exponentials

Multiply  by  .

Solution

Division of Exponentials

Divide the digit term of the numerator by the digit term of the denominator and subtract the exponents of the exponential terms.

EXAMPLE B4

Dividing Exponentials

Divide  by  .

Solution

Squaring of Exponentials

Square the digit term in the usual way and multiply the exponent of the exponential term by 2.

EXAMPLE B5

Squaring Exponentials

Square the number  .

Solution

Cubing of Exponentials

Cube the digit term in the usual way and multiply the exponent of the exponential term by 3.

EXAMPLE B6

Cubing Exponentials

Cube the number  .

Solution

Taking Square Roots of Exponentials

If necessary, decrease or increase the exponential term so that the power of 10 is evenly divisible by 2. Extract the square root of the digit term and divide the exponential term by 2.

EXAMPLE B7

Finding the Square Root of Exponentials

Find the square root of  .

Solution

Significant Figures

A beekeeper reports that he has 525,341 bees. The last three figures of the number are obviously inaccurate, for during the time the keeper was counting the bees, some of them died and others hatched; this makes it quite difficult to determine the exact number of bees. It would have been more reasonable if the beekeeper had reported the number 525,000. In other words, the last three figures are not significant, except to set the position of the decimal point. Their exact values have no useful meaning in this situation. When reporting quantities, use only as many significant figures as the accuracy of the measurement warrants.

The importance of significant figures lies in their application to fundamental computation. In addition and subtraction, the sum or difference should contain as many digits to the right of the decimal as that in the least certain of the numbers used in the computation (indicated by underscoring in the following example).

EXAMPLE B8

Addition and Subtraction with Significant Figures

Add  and  .

Solution

In multiplication and division, the product or quotient should contain no more digits than that in the factor containing the least number of significant figures.

Multiplication and Division with Significant Figures Multiply 0.6238 by 6.6.

Solution

When rounding numbers, increase the retained digit by 1 if it is followed by a number larger than 5 (“round up”). Do not change the retained digit if the digits that follow are less than 5 (“round down”). If the retained digit is followed by 5, round up if the retained digit is odd, or round down if it is even (after rounding, the retained digit will thus always be even).

The Use of Logarithms and Exponential Numbers

The common logarithm of a number (log) is the power to which 10 must be raised to equal that number. For example, the common logarithm of 100 is 2, because 10 must be raised to the second power to equal 100. Additional examples follow.

Logarithms and Exponential Numbers

What is the common logarithm of 60? Because 60 lies between 10 and 100, which have logarithms of 1 and 2, respectively, the logarithm of 60 is 1.7782; that is,

The common logarithm of a number less than 1 has a negative value. The logarithm of 0.03918 is −1.4069, or

To obtain the common logarithm of a number, use the logbutton on your calculator. To calculate a number from its logarithm, take the inverse log of the logarithm, or calculate  (where  is the logarithm of the number).

The natural logarithm of a number (ln) is the power to which  must be raised to equal the number;  is the constant 2.7182818. For example, the natural logarithm of 10 is 2.303; that is,

To obtain the natural logarithm of a number, use the lnbutton on your calculator. To calculate a number from its natural logarithm, enter the natural logarithm and take the inverse ln of the natural logarithm, or calculate  (where  is the natural logarithm of the number).

Logarithms are exponents; thus, operations involving logarithms follow the same rules as operations involving

exponents.

1. The logarithm of a product of two numbers is the sum of the logarithms of the two numbers. log  ，and ln 

2. The logarithm of the number resulting from the division of two numbers is the difference between the logarithms of the two numbers.

3. The logarithm of a number raised to an exponent is the product of the exponent and the logarithm of the number.

The Solution of Quadratic Equations

Mathematical functions of this form are known as second-order polynomials or, more commonly, quadratic functions.

The solution or roots for any quadratic equation can be calculated using the following formula:

EXAMPLE B10

Solving Quadratic Equations

Solve the quadratic equation  .

Solution

Substituting the values  ,  ,  in the formula, we obtain

The two roots are therefore

Quadratic equations constructed on physical data always have real roots, and of these real roots, often only those having positive values are of any significance.

Two-Dimensional (x-y) Graphing

The relationship between any two properties of a system can be represented graphically by a two-dimensional data plot. Such a graph has two axes: a horizontal one corresponding to the independent variable, or the variable whose value is being controlled  , and a vertical axis corresponding to the dependent variable, or the variable whose value is being observed or measured (y).

When the value of yis changing as a function of  (that is, different values of  correspond to different values of  , a graph of this change can be plotted or sketched. The graph can be produced by using specific values for  data pairs.

EXAMPLE B11

Graphing the Dependence of yon x

This table contains the following points: (1,5), (2,10), (3,7), and (4,14). Each of these points can be plotted on a graph and connected to produce a graphical representation of the dependence of yon x.

If the function that describes the dependence of  on  is known, it may be used to compute x,y data pairs that may subsequently be plotted.

EXAMPLE B12

Plotting Data Pairs

If we know that  , we can produce a table of a few  values and then plot the line based on the data shown here.

Units and Conversion Factors

Units of Length

Units of Volume

Units of Mass

Units of Energy

TABLE C4

TABLE C5

Fundamental Physical Constants

Fundamental Physical Constants

Water Properties

Water Density  at Different Temperatures 

Vapor Pressure as a Function of Temperature

Specific Heat Capacity for Water

Standard Water Melting and Boiling Temperatures and Enthalpies of the Transitions

Water Cryoscopic (Freezing Point Depression) and Ebullioscopic (Boiling Point Elevation) Constants

 (cryoscopic constant)

 (ebullioscopic constant)

TABLE E6

Composition of Commercial Acids and Bases

Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances

Ionization Constants of Weak Acids

Ionization Constants of Weak Acids

Ionization Constants of Weak Bases

Ionization Constants of Weak Bases

Solubility Products

Solubility Products

Formation Constants for Complex Ions

Formation Constants for Complex Ions

Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials

Half-Lives for Several Radioactive Isotopes

Chapter 1   
1. Place a glass of water outside. It will freeze if the temperature is below  .   
3. (a) law (states a consistently observed phenomenon, can be used for prediction); (b) theory (a widely accepted explanation of the behavior of matter); (c) hypothesis (a tentative explanation, can be investigated by experimentation)   
5. (a) symbolic, microscopic; (b) macroscopic; (c) symbolic, macroscopic; (d) microscopic   
7. Macroscopic. The heat required is determined from macroscopic properties.   
9. Liquids can change their shape (flow); solids can’t. Gases can undergo large volume changes as pressure changes; liquids do not. Gases flow and change volume; solids do not.   
11. The mixture can have a variety of compositions; a pure substance has a definite composition. Both have the same composition from point to point.   
13. Molecules of elements contain only one type of atom; molecules of compounds contain two or more types of atoms. They are similar in that both are comprised of two or more atoms chemically bonded together.   
15. Answers will vary. Sample answer: Gatorade contains water, sugar, dextrose, citric acid, salt, sodium chloride, monopotassium phosphate, and sucrose acetate isobutyrate.   
17. (a) element; (b) element; (c) compound; (d) mixture; (e) compound; (f) compound; (g) compound; (h) mixture   
19. In each case, a molecule consists of two or more combined atoms. They differ in that the types of atoms change from one substance to the next.   
21. Gasoline (a mixture of compounds), oxygen, and to a lesser extent, nitrogen are consumed. Carbon dioxide and water are the principal products. Carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides are produced in lesser amounts.   
23. (a) Increased as it would have combined with oxygen in the air thus increasing the amount of matter and therefore the mass. (b)    
25. (a)  (b) The mass of the container and contents would decrease as carbon dioxide is a gaseous product and would leave the container. (c)    
27. (a) physical; (b) chemical; (c) chemical; (d) physical; (e) physical   
29. physical   
31. The value of an extensive property depends upon the amount of matter being considered, whereas the value of an intensive property is the same regardless of the amount of matter being considered.   
33. Being extensive properties, both mass and volume are directly proportional to the amount of substance under study. Dividing one extensive property by another will in effect “cancel” this dependence on amount, yielding a ratio that is independent of amount (an intensive property).   
35. about a yard   
37. (a) kilograms; (b) meters; (c) meters/second; (d) kilograms/cubic meter; (e) kelvin; (f) square meters; (g) cubic meters   
39. (a) centi-,  ; (b) deci-,  ; (c) Giga-,  ; (d) kilo-,  ; (e) milli-,  ; (f ) nano-,  ; (g) pico-,  ;  tera-,    
41. (a)  ,  . (b)  (c) dioptase (copper cyclosilicate,  ; malachite (basic copper carbonate,  ; Paraiba tourmaline (sodium lithium boron silicate with copper,    
43. (a) displaced water volume  ; (b) displaced water  (c) The block mass is  , essentially equal to the mass of displaced water  and consistent with Archimedes’ principle of buoyancy.   
45. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )  ; (g)    
47. (a) exact; (b) exact; (c) uncertain; (d) exact; (e) uncertain; (f) uncertain

49. (a) two; (b) three; (c) five; (d) four; (e) six; (f ) two; (g) five   
51. (a) 0.44; (b) 9.0; (c) 27; (d) 140; (e)  ; (f ) 0.44   
53. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c) 2.08; (d) 0.19; (e) 27,440; (f ) 43.0   
55. (a) Archer X; (b) Archer W; (c) Archer Y   
57. (a) ; (b)  ; (c)  1b   
59.    
Only two significant figures are justified.   
61.    
63.    
65.    
67. yes; weight    
69.    
71. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )    
m; (g)  ; (h)  ; (i)    
73.    
75.    
77. (a) 394 ft; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d) 2.64 L; (e)  ; (f ) 14.5 kg; (g) 324 mg   
79.  ft/cubit   
81. Yes, the acid’s volume is  .   
83. 62.6 in (about 5 ft 3 in.) and 101 lb   
85. (a)  ; (b)    
87.    
89. (a) 81.6 g; (b)    
91. (a)  ; (b) 37 L   
93.  , 3239 K   
95.    
97.    
99. 

Chapter 2

1. The starting materials consist of one green sphere and two purple spheres. The products consist of two green spheres and two purple spheres. This violates Dalton’s postulate that that atoms are not created during a chemical change, but are merely redistributed.   
3. This statement violates Dalton’s fourth postulate: In a given compound, the numbers of atoms of each type (and thus also the percentage) always have the same ratio.   
5. Dalton originally thought that all atoms of a particular element had identical properties, including mass. Thus, the concept of isotopes, in which an element has different masses, was a violation of the original idea. To account for the existence of isotopes, the second postulate of his atomic theory was modified to state that atoms of the same element must have identical chemical properties.   
7. Both are subatomic particles that reside in an atom’s nucleus. Both have approximately the same mass. Protons are positively charged, whereas neutrons are uncharged.   
9. (a) The Rutherford atom has a small, positively charged nucleus, so most  particles will pass through empty space far from the nucleus and be undeflected. Those  particles that pass near the nucleus will be deflected from their paths due to positive-positive repulsion. The more directly toward the nucleus the  particles are headed, the larger the deflection angle will be. (b) Higher-energy  particles that pass near the nucleus will still undergo deflection, but the faster they travel, the less the expected angle of deflection. (c) If the nucleus is smaller, the positive charge is smaller and the expected deflections are smaller—both in terms of how closely the  particles pass by the nucleus undeflected and the angle of deflection. If the nucleus is larger, the positive charge is larger and the expected deflections are larger—more  particles will be deflected, and the deflection angles will be larger. (d) The paths followed by the  particles match the predictions from (a), (b), and (c).

11. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d) 

13. (a) Carbon-12,  ; (b) This atom contains six protons and six neutrons. There are six electrons in a neutral  atom. The net charge of such a neutral atom is zero, and the mass number is 12. (c) The preceding answers are correct. (d) The atom will be stable since C-12 is a stable isotope of carbon. (e) The preceding answer is correct. Other answers for this exercise are possible if a different element of isotope is chosen.

15. (a) Lithium-6 contains three protons, three neutrons, and three electrons. The isotope symbol is  (b)  or 

17. (a) Iron, 26 protons, 24 electrons, and 32 neutrons; (b) iodine, 53 protons, 54 electrons, and 74 neutrons 19. (a) 3 protons, 3 electrons, 4 neutrons; (b) 52 protons, 52 electrons, 73 neutrons; (c) 47 protons, 47 electrons, 62 neutrons; (d) 7 protons, 7 electrons, 8 neutrons; (e) 15 protons, 15 electrons, 16 neutrons

21. Let us use neon as an example. Since there are three isotopes, there is no way to be sure to accurately predict the abundances to make the total of 20.18 amu average atomic mass. Let us guess that the abundances are  Ne-22,  Ne-20, and only a trace of Ne-21. The average mass would be  . Checking the nature’s mix of isotopes shows that the abundances are  Ne-20,  Ne-22, and  Ne-21, so our guessed amounts have to be slightly adjusted.

23. 79.90 amu

25. Turkey source:  (of 10.0129 amu isotope); US source:  (of 10.0129 amu isotope)

27. The symbol for the element oxygen, O, represents both the element and one atom of oxygen. A molecule of oxygen,  , contains two oxygen atoms; the subscript 2 in the formula must be used to distinguish the diatomic molecule from two single oxygen atoms.

29. (a) molecular  , empirical  ; (b) molecular  , empirical CH; (c) molecular  , empirical  ; (d) molecular  , empirical 

31. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c) HO; (d)  ; (e)    
33. (a)  ; (b) 

35. (a) ethanol

(b) methoxymethane, more commonly known as dimethyl ether (c) These molecules have the same chemical composition (types and number of atoms) but different chemical structures. They are structural isomers.

37. (a) metal, inner transition metal; (b) nonmetal, representative element; (c) metal, representative element; (d) nonmetal, representative element; (e) metal, transition metal; (f) metal, inner transition metal; (g) metal, transition metal; (h) nonmetal, representative element; (i) nonmetal, representative element; (j) metal, representative element   
39. (a) He; (b) Be; (c) Li; (d) O   
41. (a) krypton, Kr; (b) calcium, Ca; (c) fluorine, F; (d) tellurium, Te   
43. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)    
45. Ionic: KCl,  ; Covalent:  , ICl,  ,    
47. (a) covalent; (b) ionic,  ,  ; (c) ionic,  ，  (d) ionic,  ,  (e) covalent; (f ) ionic,  ,    
49. (a) CaS; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)    
51. (a) cesium chloride; (b) barium oxide; (c) potassium sulfide; (d) beryllium chloride; (e) hydrogen bromide; (f) aluminum fluoride   
53. (a) RbBr; (b) MgSe; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e) HF; (f ) GaP; (g)  ; (h)    
55. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )    
57. (a) chromium(III) oxide; (b) iron(II) chloride; (c) chromium(VI) oxide; (d) titanium(IV) chloride; (e) cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate; (f) molybdenum(IV) sulfide   
59. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )    
61. (a) manganese(IV) oxide; (b) mercury(I) chloride; (c) iron(III) nitrate; (d) titanium(IV) chloride; (e) copper(II) bromide

Chapter 3

1. (a) 12.01 amu; (b) 12.01 amu; (c) 144.12 amu; (d) 60.05 amu   
3. (a) 123.896 amu; (b) 18.015 amu; (c) 164.086 amu; (d) 60.052 amu; (e) 342.297 amu   
5. (a) 56.107 amu; (b) 54.091 amu; (c) 199.9976 amu; (d) 97.9950 amu   
7. Use the molecular formula to find the molar mass; to obtain the number of moles, divide the mass of compound by the molar mass of the compound expressed in grams.   
9. Formic acid. Its formula has twice as many oxygen atoms as the other two compounds (one each). Therefore,  of formic acid would be equivalent to  of a compound containing a single oxygen atom.   
11. The two masses have the same numerical value, but the units are different: The molecular mass is the mass of 1 molecule while the molar mass is the mass of  molecules.   
13. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)    
15. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)    
17. (a)  ; (b) 307 g; (c)  (d)  g (  ; (e)    
19. (a)  (b)  ; (c)  (d)  ; (e)    
21. (a)  ; (b)  (c)    
23. zirconium:  atoms;  silicon:  atoms; 9.504 g; oxygen:  atoms;    
25.  : 1.000 mol, or  Al;  : 1.994 mol, or  Al;  : 3.00 mol, or  ; The  sample thus contains the greatest mass of Al.   
27.  atoms   
29. 0.865 servings, or about 1 serving.   
31.  represents the least number of molecules since it has the least number of moles.   
33. (a)  ,   ; (b  ,  ,  ; (    
35.    
37. (a)  ; (b)    
39.    
41.  (empirical formula),  (molecular formula)   
43.    
45. We need to know the number of moles of sulfuric acid dissolved in the solution and the volume of the solution.   
47. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )    
49. (a) determine the number of moles of glucose in  of solution; determine the molar mass of glucose; determine the mass of glucose from the number of moles and its molar mass; (b)    
51. (a) 37.0 mol  ,  ; (b)  mol NaCN,  ; (c) 73.2 mol  ,  ; (d)  ,    
53. (a) Determine the molar mass of  ; determine the number of moles of  in the solution; from the number of moles and the volume of solution, determine the molarity; (b)    
55. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)    
57.    
59.    
61.    
63. (a)  (b) 0.04888 M; (c) 0.206 M; (d) 0.0056 M   
65.    
67.    
69. (a) The dilution equation can be used, appropriately modified to accommodate mass-based concentration units:  . This equation can be rearranged to isolate  and the given quantities substituted into this equation. (b) 

71.    
73.    
75. 95 mg/dL   
77.    
79. 0.29 mol

Chapter 4

1. An equation is balanced when the same number of each element is represented on the reactant and product sides. Equations must be balanced to accurately reflect the law of conservation of matter.

3. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )      
5. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)    
7. (a)  ,  ; (b)  (c)  (d)     
9. (a)  (b) complete ionic equation:  net ionic equation: 

11. (a)

(complete)

 (b)  (c)  (complete)  (net)

3. (a) oxidation-reduction (addition); (b) acid-base (neutralization); (c) oxidation-reduction (combustion) 15. It is an oxidation-reduction reaction because the oxidation state of the silver changes during the reaction.

17. (a)  ; (b) Al  ,  , O −2; (c)  ; (d)  ,  , O −2; (e)  ; (f )    
19. (a) acid-base; (b) oxidation-reduction: Na is oxidized,  is reduced; (c) oxidation-reduction: Mg is oxidized,  is reduced; (d) acid-base; (e) oxidation-reduction:  is oxidized,  is reduced; (f) acid-base   
21. (a)  (b)    
23. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d    
25. (a  (b) S  (a solution of  ; (c)    
27.    
29.    
31.    
33. (a)  (b)    
35. (a) step  step 2:  (b)

 (c)  and 

37. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)   (g)  

39. (a   5  (aq)+2CI-(aq) + 2HO+(aq); (d) H  (e)    
41. (a)  InO2(s) +3NO3-(aq) + 2OH-(aq); (b)  (c)    
43. (a)  (b) 0.005780 mol HgO,   ; (c)  ,  ; (d)  (e) 18.86 mol CuO, 2.330 kg CuCO3; (f )  ,    
45. (a)  (b)  ,  ; (c) 6.43 mol  ,  (d) 768 mol  ,  ; (e)  ,  ; (f )    
47. (a)  mol HCl →mol  (b)  ,    
49. (a)  molecules; (b)    
51.    
53.    
55.    
57. 161.4 mL KI solution   
59.    
61. The limiting reactant is Cl2.   
63.Percent yield    
65.  , percent yield    
67.percent yield    
69. Convert mass of ethanol to moles of ethanol; relate the moles of ethanol to the moles of ether produced using the stoichiometry of the balanced equation. Convert moles of ether to grams; divide the actual grams of ether (determined through the density) by the theoretical mass to determine the percent yield;    
71. The conversion needed is  Then compare the amount of Cr to the amount of acid present. Cr is the limiting reactant.   
73.  is the limiting reactant. percent yield    
75. Only four molecules can be made.   
77. This amount cannot be weighted by ordinary balances and is worthless.   
79.    
81.    
83.    
85. The empirical formula is  . The molecular formula is  .   
87. 49.6 mL   
89.    
91. 0.0122 M   
93. 34.99 mL KOH   
95. The empirical formula is  .

Chapter 5

1. The temperature of 1 gram of burning wood is approximately the same for both a match and a bonfire.

This is an intensive property and depends on the material (wood). However, the overall amount of produced heat depends on the amount of material; this is an extensive property. The amount of wood in a bonfire is much greater than that in a match; the total amount of produced heat is also much greater, which is why we can sit around a bonfire to stay warm, but a match would not provide enough heat to keep us from getting cold.

3. Heat capacity refers to the heat required to raise the temperature of the mass of the substance 1 degree; specific heat refers to the heat required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of the substance 1 degree. Thus, heat capacity is an extensive property, and specific heat is an intensive one.

5. (a)  ;  ; (b)    
7. 1310 J; 313 cal   
9.    
11. (a)  ; (b) Copper is a likely candidate.

13. We assume that the density of water is  and that it takes as much energy to keep the water at  as to heat it from  to  We also assume that only the water is going to be heated. Energy required 

15. lesser; more heat would be lost to the coffee cup and the environment and so  for the water would be   
lesser and the calculated  would be lesser   
17. greater, since taking the calorimeter’s heat capacity into account will compensate for the thermal energy   
transferred to the solution from the calorimeter; this approach includes the calorimeter itself, along with   
the solution, as “surroundings”:  ; since both qsolution and qcalorimeter are   
negative, including the latter term  will yield a greater value for the heat of the dissolution   
19. The temperature of the coffee will drop 1 degree.   
21.    
23.    
25.  ; The heat produced shows that the reaction is exothermic.   
27.    
29. 22.6. Since the mass and the heat capacity of the solution is approximately equal to that of the water, the   
two-fold increase in the amount of water leads to a two-fold decrease of the temperature change.   
31.    
33.    
35.    
37.  Calories   
39. The enthalpy change of the indicated reaction is for exactly 1 mol HCL and 1 mol NaOH; the heat in the   
example is produced by 0.0500 mol HCl and 0.0500 mol NaOH.   
41.    
43.    
45.    
47.  mol   
49.    
51.    
53.    
55. Yes.   
57.    
59. −494 kJ/mol   
61.    
63.    
65.    
67.    
69. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d) −232.1 kJ   
71.    
73.    
75.    
77.    
79.    
81. On the assumption that the best rocket fuel is the one that gives off the most heat,  is the prime   
candidate.   
83.    
85. (a)  (b) 1570 L air; (c)  ; (d) 

Chapter 6

1. The spectrum consists of colored lines, at least one of which (probably the brightest) is red.   
3.    
5.  ; 2.018 eV   
7.  ;  ; Energy  ; red   
9. (a)  ;  J; (b)  ;  ; The color of (a) is red; (b) is blue.   
11.  ;    
13. Red:  ;  ;  . Green:  ;  ;  . Blue:  ;  ;  . Somewhat different numbers are also possible.   
15.  ; no   
17. Quantized energy means that the electrons can possess only certain discrete energy values; values between those quantized values are not permitted.   
19.    
21.    
23.    
25. 33.9 Å   
27.    
29. Both involve a relatively heavy nucleus with electrons moving around it, although strictly speaking, the Bohr model works only for one-electron atoms or ions. According to classical mechanics, the Rutherford model predicts a miniature “solar system” with electrons moving about the nucleus in circular or elliptical orbits that are confined to planes. If the requirements of classical electromagnetic theory that electrons in such orbits would emit electromagnetic radiation are ignored, such atoms would be stable, having constant energy and angular momentum, but would not emit any visible light (contrary to observation). If classical electromagnetic theory is applied, then the Rutherford atom would emit electromagnetic radiation of continually increasing frequency (contrary to the observed discrete spectra), thereby losing energy until the atom collapsed in an absurdly short time (contrary to the observed long-term stability of atoms). The Bohr model retains the classical mechanics view of circular orbits confined to planes having constant energy and angular momentum, but restricts these to quantized values dependent on a single quantum number,  . The orbiting electron in Bohr’s model is assumed not to emit any electromagnetic radiation while moving about the nucleus in its stationary orbits, but the atom can emit or absorb electromagnetic radiation when the electron changes from one orbit to another. Because of the quantized orbits, such “quantum jumps” will produce discrete spectra, in agreement with observations.

31. Both models have a central positively charged nucleus with electrons moving about the nucleus in accordance with the Coulomb electrostatic potential. The Bohr model as umesthat the electrons move in circular orbits that have quantized energies, angular momentum, and radii that are specified by a single quantum number,  , 2, 3, …, but this quantization is an ad hoc assumption made by Bohr to incorporate quantization into an essentially classical mechanics description of the atom. Bohr also assumed that electrons orbiting the nucleus normally do not emit or absorb electromagnetic radiation, but do so when the electron switches to a different orbit. In the quantum mechanical model, the electrons do not move in precise orbits (such orbits violate the Heisenberg uncertainty principle) and, instead, a probabilistic interpretation of the electron’s position at any given instant is used, with a mathematical function  called a wavefunction that can be used to determine the electron’s spatial probability distribution. These wavefunctions, or orbitals, are three-dimensional stationary waves that can be specified by three quantum numbers that arise naturally from their underlying mathematics (no ad hoc assumptions required): the principal quantum number,  (the same one used by Bohr), which specifies shells such that orbitals having the same  all have the same energy and approximately the same spatial extent; the angular momentum quantum number l, which is a measure of the orbital’s angular momentum and corresponds to the orbitals’ general shapes, as well as specifying subshells such that orbitals having the same l(and  ) all have the same energy; and the orientation quantum number m, which is a measure of the  component of the angular momentum and corresponds to the orientations of the orbitals. The Bohr model gives the same expression for the energy as the quantum mechanical expression and, hence, both properly account for hydrogen’s discrete spectrum (an example of getting the right answers for the wrong reasons, something that many chemistry students can sympathize with), but gives the wrong expression for the angular momentum (Bohr orbits necessarily all have non-zero angular momentum, but some quantum orbitals [sorbitals] can have zero angular momentum).

33.  determines the general range for the value of energy and the probable distances that the electron can be from the nucleus. ldetermines the shape of the orbital.  determines the orientation of the orbitals of the same lvalue with respect to one another.  determines the spin of an electron.

35. (a)  (b)  ; (c) 6s   
37. (a)  ;(b)  ;(c) 

39.

41. (a) x. 2, y. 2, z. 2; (b) x. 1, y. 3, z. 0; (c) x. 4 0 0  y. 2 1 0  z. 3 2 0  (d) x. 1, y. 2, z. 3; (e) x.  ,  , y.  ,  , or  , z.  , 

43. 12

45.

47. For example,  :  ;  : 1s22s22p63s23p6;  : 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p64d105s2; F–:  ;  :  ;  :  .   
49. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e) 

51. The charge on the ion.

53. (a)

55. Zr   
57.  ,    
59. Although both (b) and (c) are correct, (e) encompasses both and is the best answer.   
61. K   
63.    
65. Co has 27 protons, 27 electrons, and 33 neutrons:  . I has 53 protons, 53 electrons,   
and 78 neutrons:  .   
67. Cl   
69. O   
71.    
73. 15 (5A)   
75.    
77.    
79. Se, As−   
81.    
83. O,    
85. Ra

Chapter 7

1. The protons in the nucleus do not change during normal chemical reactions. Only the outer electrons move. Positive charges form when electrons are lost.   
3. P, I, Cl, and O would form anions because they are nonmetals. Mg, In, Cs, Pb, and Co would form cations because they are metals.   
5. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )    
7. (a)  ; (b)  (c)  (d)  ; (e)  ; (f ) [Ar]3  ; (g)  (h)  (i)  ( j)  (k)  , (l)    
9. (a)  ;  :  ; (b)  ;  ; (c)  ;  :  ; (d)  ;  :  ; (e)  ;  ; (f )  ;    
11. NaCl consists of discrete ions arranged in a crystal lattice, not covalently bonded molecules.   
13. ionic: (b), (d), (e), (g), and (i); covalent: (a), (c), (f ), (h), (j), and    
15. (a) Cl; (b) O; (c) O; (d) S; (e) N; (f ) P; (g) N   
17. (a) H, C, N, O, F; (b) H, I, Br, Cl, F; (c) H, P, S, O, F; (d) Na, Al, H, P, O; (e) Ba, H, As, N, O   
19. N, O, F, and Cl   
21. (a) HF; (b) CO; (c) OH; (d) PCl; (e) NH; (f ) PO; (g) CN

23. (a) eight electrons:

(b) eight electrons:

(c) no electrons    
(d) eight electrons: ·2 :0:   
(e) no electrons    
(f) no electrons    
(g) eight electrons: 3 :N:

25. (a) Mg2+ S: (b) A3+ : (c) Ga3+ :Ci: (d) K+ : (e) Li+ :N (f ) K+ F:

27. :P=P:

29. (a)

:0=o:

In this case, the Lewis structure is inadequate to depict the fact that experimental studies have shown two unpaired electrons in each oxygen molecule.

(c):F:  
： ·  
:F-As-F:：

(d) · ： · :CI-N=o · ·

(g)

(i) H-C三C-H

(j) ·   
:CI-C三N: ·

(k) c三c²+

33. Two valence electrons per Pb atom are transferred to Cl atoms; the resulting  ion has a  valence shell configuration. Two of the valence electrons in the HCl molecule are shared, and the other six are located on the Cl atom as lone pairs of electrons.

35.

39. (a)

41.

43. Each bond includes a sharing of electrons between atoms. Two electrons are shared in a single bond; four electrons are shared in a double bond; and six electrons are shared in a triple bond.

47.

49. (a) o=c=o (b) :c三o:

CO has the strongest carbon-oxygen bond because there is a triple bond joining C and O.  has double bonds.

51. (a) H: 0, Cl: 0; (b) C: 0, F: 0; (c) P: 0, Cl 0; (d) P: 0, F: 0

53. Cl in  : 0; Cl in BeCl2: 0; Cl in  : 0

55. (a)

(b)

:0 s=o o=s 0: · ： · ： Formal charge: -1  0 0 +1 -1

57. HOCl

59. The structure that gives zero formal charges is consistent with the actual structure:

63. 

65. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c) 

67. The greater bond energy is in the figure on the left. It is the more stable form.   
69.

71. The  bond in  is stronger.

73.

The  single bonds are longest.

75. (a) When two electrons are removed from the valence shell, the Ca radius loses the outermost energy level and reverts to the lower  level, which is much smaller in radius. (b) The  charge on calcium pulls the oxygen much closer compared with K, thereby increasing the lattice energy relative to a less charged ion. (c) Removal of the  electron in Ca requires more energy than removal of the  electron in K because of the stronger attraction of the nucleus and the extra energy required to break the pairing of the

electrons. The second ionization energy for K requires that an electron be removed from a lower energy level, where the attraction is much stronger from the nucleus for the electron. In addition, energy is required to unpair two electrons in a full orbital. For Ca, the second ionization potential requires removing only a lone electron in the exposed outer energy level. (d) In Al, the removed electron is relatively unprotected and unpaired in a  orbital. The higher energy for Mg mainly reflects the unpairing of the  electron.

77. (d)

79.  ; both ions in MgO have twice the charge of the ions in LiF; the bond length is very similar and both have the same structure; a quadrupling of the energy is expected based on the equation for lattice energy

81. (a)  ;  has a smaller radius than  ; (b) BaS; Ba has a larger charge than K; (c) BaS; Ba and S have larger charges; (d) BaS; S has a larger charge

83. (e)

85. The placement of the two sets of unpaired electrons in water forces the bonds to assume a tetrahedral arrangement, and the resulting HOH molecule is bent. The HBeH molecule (in which Be has only two electrons to bond with the two electrons from the hydrogens) must have the electron pairs as far from one another as possible and is therefore linear.

87. Space must be provided for each pair of electrons whether they are in a bond or are present as lone pairs. Electron-pair geometry considers the placement of all electrons. Molecular structure considers only the bonding-pair geometry.

89. As long as the polar bonds are compensated (for example. two identical atoms are found directly across the central atom from one another), the molecule can be nonpolar.

91. (a) Both the electron geometry and the molecular structure are octahedral. (b) Both the electron geometry and the molecular structure are trigonal bipyramid. (c) Both the electron geometry and the molecular structure are linear. (d) Both the electron geometry and the molecular structure are trigonal planar.

93. (a) electron-pair geometry: octahedral, molecular structure: square pyramidal; (b) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: bent; (c) electron-pair geometry: octahedral, molecular structure: square planar; (d) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: trigonal pyramidal; (e) electron-pair geometry: trigonal bypyramidal, molecular structure: seesaw; (f) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: bent 

95. (a) electron-pair geometry: trigonal planar, molecular structure: bent  ; (b) electron-pair geometry: linear, molecular structure: linear; (c) electron-pair geometry: trigonal planar, molecular structure: trigonal planar; (d) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: trigonal pyramidal; (e) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: tetrahedral; (f) electron-pair geometry: trigonal bipyramidal, molecular structure: seesaw; (g) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: trigonal pyramidal

97. All of these molecules and ions contain polar bonds. Only  ,  ，  ,  , and  have dipole moments.

99.  ,  ,  , and ClNO all have dipole moments.

101. P

103. nonpolar

105. (a) tetrahedral; (b) trigonal pyramidal; (c) bent  ; (d) trigonal planar; (e) bent  ; (f ) bent  ; (g)  tetrahedral,  linear; (h) tetrahedral; (i)  linear;  trigonal planar

107.

B一AB  ,linear   
B H2O,bent with an approximately  angle B   
B-A SO2, bent with an approximately  angle B

109. (a)

(b) S=C= =S   
(c) :c三s:

(d)  includes three regions of electron density (all are bonds with no lone pairs); the shape is trigonal planar;  has only two regions of electron density (all bonds with no lone pairs); the shape is linear

111. The Lewis structure is made from three units, but the atoms must be rearranged:

113. The molecular dipole points away from the hydrogen atoms.

115. The structures are very similar. In the model mode, each electron group occupies the same amount of space, so the bond angle is shown as  . In the “real” mode, the lone pairs are larger, causing the hydrogens to be compressed. This leads to the smaller angle of  .

Chapter 8

1. Similarities: Both types of bonds result from overlap of atomic orbitals on adjacent atoms and contain a maximum of two electrons. Differences: σ bonds are stronger and result from end-to-end overlap and all single bonds are σ bonds; π bonds between the same two atoms are weaker because they result from sideby-side overlap, and multiple bonds contain one or more π bonds (in addition to a σ bond).

3. The specific average bond distance is the distance with the lowest energy. At distances less than the bond distance, the positive charges on the two nuclei repel each other, and the overall energy increases.

5. Bonding: One σ bond and one π bond. The  orbitals are filled and do not overlap. The  orbitals overlap along the axis to form a σ bond and side-by-side to form the π bond.

7. No, two of the  orbitals (one on each N) will be oriented end-to-end and will form a σ bond.

N三N

9. Hybridization is introduced to explain the geometry of bonding orbitals in valance bond theory.   
11. There are no  orbitals in the valence shell of carbon.

13. trigonal planar,  ; trigonal pyramidal (one lone pair on A)  ; T-shaped (two lone pairs on A  , or (three lone pairs on A)    
15. (a) Each S has a bent  geometry, 

(b) Bent  ), sp2 (c) Trigonal planar, sp2 (d) Tetrahedral, 

17. (a)  (b) :F-x-F: (c) linear (d) sp3d

19. (a)

(b) P atoms, trigonal pyramidal; S atoms, bent, with two lone pairs; Cl atoms, trigonal pyramidal; (c) Hybridization about P, S, and Cl is, in all cases,  ; (d) Oxidation states  Cl  , O –2. Formal charges: P 0; S 0; Cl  : O –1

21.

Phosphorus and nitrogen can form  hybrids to form three bonds and hold one lone pair in  and  , respectively. However, nitrogen has no valence  orbitals, so it cannot form a set of  hybrid orbitals to bind five fluorine atoms in  . Phosphorus has  orbitals and can bind five fluorine atoms with 

hybrid orbitals in  .

23. A triple bond consists of one  bond and two π bonds. A σ bond is stronger than a π bond due to greater overlap.

25. (a)

(b) The terminal carbon atom uses  hybrid orbitals, while the central carbon atom is sphybridized. (c) Each of the two π bonds is formed by overlap of a  orbital on carbon and a nitrogen  orbital.

27. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )    
29. (a)  , delocalized; (b)  , localized; (c)  , delocalized; (d)  , delocalized

31.

Orbitals inan isolated C atom

Orbitals in the  hybridized  in 

Each of the four electrons is in a separate orbital and overlaps with an electron on an oxygen atom.   
33. (a) Similarities: Both are bonding orbitals that can contain a maximum of two electrons. Differences: σ orbitals are end-to-end combinations of atomic orbitals, whereas π orbitals are formed by side-by-side overlap of orbitals. (b) Similarities: Both are quantum-mechanical constructs that represent the probability of finding the electron about the atom or the molecule. Differences:  for an atomic orbital describes the behavior of only one electron at a time based on the atom. For a molecule,  represents a mathematical combination of atomic orbitals. (c) Similarities: Both are orbitals that can contain two electrons. Differences: Bonding orbitals result in holding two or more atoms together. Antibonding orbitals have the effect of destabilizing any bonding that has occurred.   
35. An odd number of electrons can never be paired, regardless of the arrangement of the molecular orbitals. It will always be paramagnetic.   
37. Bonding orbitals have electron density in close proximity to more than one nucleus. The interaction between the bonding positively charged nuclei and negatively charged electrons stabilizes the system.   
39. The pairing of the two bonding electrons lowers the energy of the system relative to the energy of the nonbonded electrons.   
41. (a)  bond order  ,  bond order  ,  bond order  , strongest bond is  ; (b)  bond order  ,  bond order  ;  bond order  , strongest bond is  (c)  bond order  ,  bond order  ,  bond order  , strongest bond is  ;(d)  bond order  ,  bond order  ,  bond order  , strongest bond is  (e)  bond order  ,  bond order  ,  bond order  , strongest bond is    
43. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c) O; (d)  ; (e)    
45. Yes, fluorine is a smaller atom than Li, so atoms in the  orbital are closer to the nucleus and more stable.   
47.    
49.  has s-p mixing, so the π orbitals are the last filled in   does not have s-p mixing, so the  orbital fills before the  orbitals.

Chapter 9

1. The cutting edge of a knife that has been sharpened has a smaller surface area than a dull knife. Since pressure is force per unit area, a sharp knife will exert a higher pressure with the same amount of force and cut through material more effectively. 3. Lying down distributes your weight over a larger surface area, exerting less pressure on the ice compared to standing up. If you exert less pressure, you are less likely to break through thin ice. 5. 0.809 atm;  7.  9. Earth: 14.7 lb  ; Venus:  lb in−2 11. (a)  ; (b) 51 torr drop 13. (a) 264 torr; (b)  ; (c) 0.352 bar 15. (a)  ; (b) 0.820 atm; (c)  17. With a closed-end manometer, no change would be observed, since the vaporized liquid would contribute equal, opposing pressures in both arms of the manometer tube. However, with an open-ended manometer, a higher pressure reading of the gas would be obtained than expected, since  liquid. 19. As the bubbles rise, the pressure decreases, so their volume increases as suggested by Boyle’s law. 21. (a) The number of particles in the gas increases as the volume increases. (b) temperature, pressure 23. The curve would be farther to the right and higher up, but the same basic shape. 25. About  27.  torr 29. 12.1 L 31. 217 L 33.  mol;  35. (a)  ; (b)  (c)  37. 5561 L 39.  41. For a gas exhibiting ideal behavior:

43. (a)  ; (b) 4.66 L  F   
45. 0.644 atm   
47. The pressure decreases by a factor of 3.   
49.    
51.    
53.    
55.  ;    
57. 141 atm, 107,000 torr,    
59.  :  ;  :  ;  : 3.4 kPa   
61. Yes   
63. 740 torr   
65. (a) Determine the moles of HgO that decompose; using the chemical equation, determine the moles of    
produced by decomposition of this amount of  ; and determine the volume of  from the moles of  ,   
temperature, and pressure. (b)    
67. (a) Determine the molar mass of  . From the balanced equation, calculate the moles of  needed for   
the complete reaction. From the ideal gas law, convert moles of  into volume. (b)    
69. (a) Balance the equation. Determine the grams of  produced and the number of moles. From the ideal   
gas law, determine the volume of gas. (b)    
71.    
73. (a) 18.0 L; (b) 0.533 atm   
75. 

77. 

79. 

81. 4.2 hours

83. Effusion can be defined as the process by which a gas escapes through a pinhole into a vacuum. Graham’s law states that with a mixture of two gases A and B:  Both A and B are in the same container at the same temperature, and therefore will have the same kinetic energy:

85. 

87. 1.4; 1.2

89. 51.7 cm

91. Yes. At any given instant, there are a range of values of molecular speeds in a sample of gas. Any single molecule can speed up or slow down as it collides with other molecules. The average speed of all the molecules is constant at constant temperature.

93.  . Cooling slows the speeds of the He atoms, causing them to behave as though they were heavier.

95. (a) The number of collisions per unit area of the container wall is constant. (b) The average kinetic energy doubles. (c) The root mean square speed increases to  times its initial value;  is proportional to √KEavg.

97. (a) equal; (b) less than; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )  ; net lifting capacity  lb; (g) 270 L; (h) 

99. Gases C, E, and F

101. The gas behavior most like an ideal gas will occur under the conditions in (b). Molecules have high speeds and move through greater distances between collision; they also have shorter contact times and interactions are less likely. Deviations occur with the conditions described in (a) and (c). Under conditions of (a), some gases may liquefy. Under conditions of (c), most gases will liquefy.

103. 

105. (a) A straight horizontal line at 1.0; (b) When real gases are at low pressures and high temperatures, they behave close enough to ideal gases that they are approximated as such; however, in some cases, we see that at a high pressure and temperature, the ideal gas approximation breaks down and is significantly different from the pressure calculated by the ideal gas equation. (c) The greater the compressibility, the more the volume matters. At low pressures, the correction factor for intermolecular attractions is more significant, and the effect of the volume of the gas molecules on Z would be a small lowering compressibility. At higher pressures, the effect of the volume of the gas molecules themselves on Z would increase compressibility (see Figure 9.35). (d) Once again, at low pressures, the effect of intermolecular attractions on Z would be more important than the correction factor for the volume of the gas molecules themselves, though perhaps still small. At higher pressures and low temperatures, the effect of intermolecular attractions would be larger. See Figure 9.35. (e) Low temperatures

Chapter 10

1. Liquids and solids are similar in that they are matter composed of atoms, ions, or molecules. They are incompressible and have similar densities that are both much larger than those of gases. They are different in that liquids have no fixed shape, and solids are rigid.   
3. They are similar in that the atoms or molecules are free to move from one position to another. They differ in that the particles of a liquid are confined to the shape of the vessel in which they are placed. In contrast, a gas will expand without limit to fill the space into which it is placed.

5. All atoms and molecules will condense into a liquid or solid in which the attractive forces exceed the kinetic energy of the molecules, at sufficiently low temperature.

7. (a) Dispersion forces occur as an atom develops a temporary dipole moment when its electrons are distributed asymmetrically about the nucleus. This structure is more prevalent in large atoms such as argon or radon. A second atom can then be distorted by the appearance of the dipole in the first atom. The electrons of the second atom are attracted toward the positive end of the first atom, which sets up a dipole in the second atom. The net result is rapidly fluctuating, temporary dipoles that attract one another (e.g., Ar). (b) A dipole-dipole attraction is a force that results from an electrostatic attraction of the positive end of one polar molecule for the negative end of another polar molecule (e.g., ICI molecules attract one another by dipole-dipole interaction). (c) Hydrogen bonds form whenever a hydrogen atom is bonded to one of the more electronegative atoms, such as a fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen atom. The electrostatic attraction between the partially positive hydrogen atom in one molecule and the partially negative atom in another molecule gives rise to a strong dipole-dipole interaction called a hydrogen bond (e.g.,

The London forces typically increase as the number of electrons increase.

11. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d) 

13. Only rather small dipole-dipole interactions from C-H bonds are available to hold  -butane in the liquid state. Chloroethane, however, has rather large dipole interactions because of the Cl-C bond; the interaction, therefore, is stronger, leading to a higher boiling point.

15.  . Water has stronger hydrogen bonds, so it melts at a higher temperature.

17. The hydrogen bond between two hydrogen fluoride molecules is stronger than that between two water molecules because the electronegativity of F is greater than that of O. Consequently, the partial negative charge on F is greater than that on O. The hydrogen bond between the partially positive H and the larger partially negative F will be stronger than that formed between H and O.

19. H-bonding is the principle IMF holding the protein strands together. The H-bonding is between the  and 

21. (a) hydrogen bonding, dipole-dipole attraction, and dispersion forces; (b) dispersion forces; (c) dipoledipole attraction and dispersion forces

23. The water molecules have strong intermolecular forces of hydrogen bonding. The water molecules are thus attracted strongly to one another and exhibit a relatively large surface tension, forming a type of “skin” at its surface. This skin can support a bug or paper clip if gently placed on the water.

25. Temperature has an effect on intermolecular forces: The higher the temperature, the greater the kinetic energies of the molecules and the greater the extent to which their intermolecular forces are overcome, and so the more fluid (less viscous) the liquid. The lower the temperature, the less the intermolecular forces are overcome, and so the less viscous the liquid.

27. (a) As the water reaches higher temperatures, the increased kinetic energies of its molecules are more effective in overcoming hydrogen bonding, and so its surface tension decreases. Surface tension and intermolecular forces are directly related. (b) The same trend in viscosity is seen as in surface tension, and for the same reason.

29. 

31. The heat is absorbed by the ice, providing the energy required to partially overcome intermolecular attractive forces in the solid and causing a phase transition to liquid water. The solution remains at  until all the ice is melted. Only the amount of water existing as ice changes until the ice disappears. Then the temperature of the water can rise.

33. We can see the amount of liquid in an open container decrease and we can smell the vapor of some liquids.

35. The vapor pressure of a liquid decreases as the strength of its intermolecular forces increases.

37. As the temperature increases, the average kinetic energy of the molecules of gasoline increases and so a greater fraction of molecules have sufficient energy to escape from the liquid than at lower temperatures. 39. They are equal when the pressure of gas above the liquid is exactly 1 atm.

41. approximately 

43. (a) At 5000 feet, the atmospheric pressure is lower than at sea level, and water will therefore boil at a lower temperature. This lower temperature will cause the physical and chemical changes involved in cooking the egg to proceed more slowly, and a longer time is required to fully cook the egg. (b) As long as the air

surrounding the body contains less water vapor than the maximum that air can hold at that temperature, perspiration will evaporate, thereby cooling the body by removing the heat of vaporization required to vaporize the water.

45. Dispersion forces increase with molecular mass or size. As the number of atoms composing the molecules in this homologous series increases, so does the extent of intermolecular attraction via dispersion forces and, consequently, the energy required to overcome these forces and vaporize the liquids.

47. The boiling point of  is higher than that of  partially because of the higher molecular weight of  ; consequently, the attractive forces are stronger in  . It would be expected, therefore, that the heat of vaporization would be greater than that of  for  . A value of  would seem reasonable. A value of  would indicate a release of energy upon vaporization, which is clearly implausible.

49. The thermal energy (heat) needed to evaporate the liquid is removed from the skin.

51. 

53. (a)  ; (b) It is likely that the heat of vaporization will have a larger magnitude since in the case of vaporization the intermolecular interactions have to be completely overcome, while melting weakens or destroys only some of them.

55. At low pressures and  , the water is a gas. As the pressure increases to 4.6 torr, the water becomes a solid; as the pressure increases still more, it becomes a liquid. At  , water at low pressure is a vapor; at pressures higher than about 75 torr, it converts into a liquid. At  , water goes from a gas to a solid as the pressure increases above very low values.

57. (a) gas; (b) gas; (c) gas; (d) gas; (e) solid; (f ) gas

59.

61. Yes, ice will sublime, although it may take it several days. Ice has a small vapor pressure, and some ice molecules form gas and escape from the ice crystals. As time passes, more and more solid converts to gas until eventually the clothes are dry.

63. (a)

(e) liquid phase (f) sublimation

65. (e) molecular crystals

67. Ice has a crystalline structure stabilized by hydrogen bonding. These intermolecular forces are of comparable strength and thus require the same amount of energy to overcome. As a result, ice melts at a single temperature and not over a range of temperatures. The various, very large molecules that compose butter experience varied van der Waals attractions of various strengths that are overcome at various temperatures, and so the melting process occurs over a wide temperature range.

69. (a) ionic; (b) covalent network; (c) molecular; (d) metallic; (e) covalent network; (f) molecular; (g)

molecular; (h) ionic; (i) ionic 71.  ionic;  metallic;  covalent network 73. (b) metallic solid 75. The structure of this low-temperature form of iron (below  is body-centered cubic. There is oneeighth atom at each of the eight corners of the cube and one atom in the center of the cube. 77. eight 79. 12 81. (a)  ; (b)  83. (a)  ; (b)  85. The crystal structure of Si shows that it is less tightly packed (coordination number 4) in the solid than Al (coordination number 12). 87. In a closest-packed array, two tetrahedral holes exist for each anion. If only half the tetrahedral holes are occupied, the numbers of anions and cations are equal. The formula for cadmium sulfide is CdS. 89.  91. In a simple cubic array, only one cubic hole can be occupied be a cation for each anion in the array. The ratio of thallium to iodide must be 1:1; therefore, the formula for thallium is TlI. 93.  ; The oxidation number of titanium is  . 95. Both ions are close in size: Mg, 0.65; Li, 0.60. This similarity allows the two to interchange rather easily. The difference in charge is generally compensated by the switch of  for  . 97.  99.  101.  103.  105. 

Chapter 11

1. A solution can vary in composition, while a compound cannot vary in composition. Solutions are homogeneous at the molecular level, while other mixtures are heterogeneous. 3. (a) The process is endothermic as the solution is consuming heat. (b) Attraction between the  and  ions is stronger than between the ions and water molecules (the ion-ion interactions have a lower, more negative energy). Therefore, the dissolution process increases the energy of the molecular interactions, and it consumes the thermal energy of the solution to make up for the difference. (c) No, an ideal solution is formed with no appreciable heat release or consumption.   
5. (a) ion-dipole forces; (b) dipole-dipole forces; (c) dispersion forces; (d) dispersion forces; (e) hydrogen bonding 7. Heat is released when the total intermolecular forces (IMFs) between the solute and solvent molecules are stronger than the total IMFs in the pure solute and in the pure solvent: Breaking weaker IMFs and forming stronger IMFs releases heat. Heat is absorbed when the total IMFs in the solution are weaker than the total of those in the pure solute and in the pure solvent: Breaking stronger IMFs and forming weaker IMFs absorbs heat.   
9. Crystals of NaCl dissolve in water, a polar liquid with a very large dipole moment, and the individual ions become strongly solvated. Hexane is a nonpolar liquid with a dipole moment of zero and, therefore, does not significantly interact with the ions of the NaCl crystals.   
11. (a)  is a strong electrolyte, thus it should completely dissociate into  and  ions. Therefore, (z) best represents the solution. (b)    
13. (a) high conductivity (solute is an ionic compound that will dissociate when dissolved); (b) high conductivity (solute is a strong acid and will ionize completely when dissolved); (c) nonconductive (solute is a covalent compound, neither acid nor base, unreactive towards water); (d) low conductivity (solute is a weak base and will partially ionize when dissolved)   
15. (a) ion-dipole; (b) hydrogen bonds; (c) dispersion forces; (d) dipole-dipole attractions; (e) dispersion forces   
17. The solubility of solids usually decreases upon cooling a solution, while the solubility of gases usually decreases upon heating.   
19. 

21. 

23. 2.9 atm

25. 102 L HCl

27. The strength of the bonds between like molecules is stronger than the strength between unlike molecules. Therefore, some regions will exist in which the water molecules will exclude oil molecules and other regions will exist in which oil molecules will exclude water molecules, forming a heterogeneous region.

29. Both form homogeneous solutions; their boiling point elevations are the same, as are their lowering of vapor pressures. Osmotic pressure and the lowering of the freezing point are also the same for both solutions.

31. (a) Find number of moles of  and  in  of the solution. Find the mole fractions for the components. (b) The mole fraction of  is 0.378. The mole fraction of  is 0.622.

33. (a)  ；  (b)  ；  (c)  ； (d)  ； 

35. In a 1  solution, the mole is contained in exactly  of solution. In a 1 msolution, the mole is contained in exactly  of solvent.

37. (a) Determine the molar mass of  . Determine the number of moles of acid in the solution. From the number of moles and the mass of solvent, determine the molality. (b) 

39. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)    
41. 

43. (a) Determine the molar mass of sucrose; determine the number of moles of sucrose in the solution; convert the mass of solvent to units of kilograms; from the number of moles and the mass of solvent, determine the molality; determine the difference between the boiling point of water and the boiling point of the solution; determine the new boiling point. (b) 

45. (a) Determine the molar mass of sucrose; determine the number of moles of sucrose in the solution; convert the mass of solvent to units of kilograms; from the number of moles and the mass of solvent, determine the molality; determine the difference between the freezing temperature of water and the freezing temperature of the solution; determine the new freezing temperature. (b) 

47. (a) Determine the molar mass of  ; determine the number of moles of  in the solution; determine the number of moles of ions in the solution; determine the molarity of ions, then the osmotic pressure. (b) 2.67 atm

49. (a) Determine the molal concentration from the change in boiling point and  ; determine the moles of solute in the solution from the molal concentration and mass of solvent; determine the molar mass from the number of moles and the mass of solute. (b) 

51. No. Pure benzene freezes at  , and so the observed freezing point of this solution is depressed by   The value computed, assuming no ionization of HCl, is   . Agreement of these values supports the assumption that HCl is not ionized.

53.    
55.    
57. S8   
59.    
61.    
63.    
65. (a)  ；;  (b) Vapor pressures are:  : 55 torr;  : 18 torr; (c)   
 ;  : 0.25

67. The ions and compounds present in the water in the beef lower the freezing point of the beef below 

The observed change equals the theoretical change; therefore, no dissociation occurs.

71.

73. Colloidal dispersions consist of particles that are much bigger than the solutes of typical solutions. Colloidal particles are either very large molecules or aggregates of smaller species that usually are big enough to scatter light. Colloids are homogeneous on a macroscopic (visual) scale, while solutions are homogeneous on a microscopic (molecular) scale.

75. If they are placed in an electrolytic cell, dispersed particles will move toward the electrode that carries a charge opposite to their own charge. At this electrode, the charged particles will be neutralized and will coagulate as a precipitate.

Chapter 12

1. The instantaneous rate is the rate of a reaction at any particular point in time, a period of time that is so short that the concentrations of reactants and products change by a negligible amount. The initial rate is the instantaneous rate of reaction as it starts (as product just begins to form). Average rate is the average of the instantaneous rates over a time period.

3. 

5. (a) average rate,  ; average rate,  ; (b) instantaneous rate,  ; (c) average rate for B formation  ; instantaneous rate for B formation 

7. Higher molarity increases the rate of the reaction. Higher temperature increases the rate of the reaction. Smaller pieces of magnesium metal will react more rapidly than larger pieces because more reactive surface exists.

9. (a) Depending on the angle selected, the atom may take a long time to collide with the molecule and, when a collision does occur, it may not result in the breaking of the bond and the forming of the other. (b) Particles of reactant must come into contact with each other before they can react.

11. (a) very slow; (b) As the temperature is increased, the reaction proceeds at a faster rate. The amount of reactants decreases, and the amount of products increases. After a while, there is a roughly equal amount of BC, AB, and  in the mixture and a slight excess of A.

13. (a) 2; (b) 1

15. (a) The process reduces the rate by a factor of 4. (b) Since CO does not appear in the rate law, the rate is not affected.

17. 

19.  ar   
21. rate  ;  (about  for the average male); The reaction is zero order.   
23. rate  ;  ; second order   
25. rate  ;  ; second order in NO; first order in    
27. (a) The rate law is second order in A and is written as rate  . (b)    
29. (a)    
31. rate  ; 

33. Plotting a graph of  versus  reveals a linear trend; therefore we know this is a first-order reaction:

34.

The plot is nicely linear, so the reaction is second order.    
36.    
38.    
40. 0.826 s   
42. The reaction is first order.    
44.  remains   
46. 252 days   
48.

50. The reactants either may be moving too slowly to have enough kinetic energy to exceed the activation energy for the reaction, or the orientation of the molecules when they collide may prevent the reaction from occurring.

52. The activation energy is the minimum amount of energy necessary to form the activated complex in a reaction. It is usually expressed as the energy necessary to form one mole of activated complex.   
54. After finding  at several different temperatures, a plot of ln  versus  gives a straight line with the slope from which Ea may be determined.   
56. (a) 4-times faster (b) 128-times faster   
58.3.9 × 1015 s-1   
60.    
62.    
64.  ;  ;  ; (b)  or  day; (c) Assuming that the reaction is irreversible simplifies the calculation because we do not have to account for any reactant that, having been converted to product, returns to the original state.   
66. The  atom has enough energy to react with BC; however, the different angles at which it bounces off of BC without reacting indicate that the orientation of the molecule is an important part of the reaction kinetics and determines whether a reaction will occur.   
68. No. In general, for the overall reaction, we cannot predict the effect of changing the concentration without knowing the rate law. Yes. If the reaction is an elementary reaction, then doubling the concentration of  doubles the rate.   
70. Rate  ;    
72. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)    
74. (a) Doubling  doubles the rate.  must enter the rate law to the first power. Doubling [NO] increases the rate by a factor of 4. [NO] must enter the rate law to the second power. (b)  (c)   ; (d)  ; (e) Step II is the rate-determining step. If step I gives  in adequate amount, steps 1 and 2 combine to give  This reaction corresponds to the observed rate law. Combine steps 1 and 2 with step 3, which occurs by supposition in a rapid fashion, to give the appropriate stoichiometry.   
76. The general mode of action for a catalyst is to provide a mechanism by which the reactants can unite more readily by taking a path with a lower reaction energy. The rates of both the forward and the reverse reactions are increased, leading to a faster achievement of equilibrium.   
78. (a) Chlorine atoms are a catalyst because they react in the second step but are regenerated in the third step. Thus, they are not used up, which is a characteristic of catalysts. (b) NO is a catalyst for the same reason as in part (a).   
80. The lowering of the transition state energy indicates the effect of a catalyst. (a) B; (b) B   
82. The energy needed to go from the initial state to the transition state is (a)  ; (b)  .   
84. Both diagrams describe two-step, exothermic reactions, but with different changes in enthalpy, suggesting the diagrams depict two different overall reactions.

Chapter 13

1. The reaction can proceed in both the forward and reverse directions.   
3. When a system has reached equilibrium, no further changes in the reactant and product concentrations occur; the forward and reverse reactions continue to proceed, but at equal rates.   
5. Not necessarily. A system at equilibrium is characterized by constantreactant and product concentrations, but the values of the reactant and product concentrations themselves need not be equal.   
7. Equilibrium cannot be established between the liquid and the gas phase if the top is removed from the

bottle because the system is not closed; one of the components of the equilibrium, the  vapor, would escape from the bottle until all liquid disappeared. Thus, more liquid would evaporate than can condense back from the gas phase to the liquid phase.

9. (a)  . AgCl is insoluble; thus, the concentrations of ions are much less than  ; (b)  because  is insoluble and formation of the solid will reduce the concentration of ions to a low level  .

11. Since  a value of  means that  predominates over  . In such a case, the reaction would be commercially feasible if the rate to equilibrium is suitable.   
13.    
15. (a  (f ) q   
17. (a)  proceeds left; (b)  proceeds right; (c)  undefined proceeds left; (d)  proceeds right; (e)  proceeds right; (f)  proceeds left   
19. The system will shift toward the reactants to reach equilibrium.   
21. (a) homogenous; (b) homogenous; (c) homogenous; (d) heterogeneous; (e) heterogeneous; (f) homogenous; (g) heterogeneous; (h) heterogeneous   
23. This situation occurs in (a) and (b).   
25. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)    
27.    
29.    
31. The amount of  must be so small that  is less than  when the  has completely decomposed. In other words, the starting amount of  cannot completely generate the full  required for equilibrium.   
33. The change in enthalpy may be used. If the reaction is exothermic, the heat produced can be thought of as a product. If the reaction is endothermic the heat added can be thought of as a reactant. Additional heat would shift an exothermic reaction back to the reactants but would shift an endothermic reaction to the products. Cooling an exothermic reaction causes the reaction to shift toward the product side; cooling an endothermic reaction would cause it to shift to the reactants’ side.   
34. No, it is not at equilibrium. Because the system is not confined, products continuously escape from the region of the flame; reactants are also added continuously from the burner and surrounding atmosphere.   
36. Add  ; add  ; decrease the container volume; heat the mixture.   
38. (a)  increase  shift right, Vdecrease  shift left; (b) Tincrease  shift right,  effect; (c)  increase  shift left, Vdecrease  shift left; (d)  increase  shift left, Vdecrease  shift right.   
40. (a)  (b)  increases, [CO] decreases,  increases; (c),  increases, [CO] decreases,  decreases; (d),  increases, [CO] increases,  increases; (e),  increases, [CO] increases,  decreases; (f), no changes.   
42. (a) (b) [H2O] no change, [CO] no change, [H2] no change; (c) [H2O] decreases, [CO] decreases,  decreases; (d)  increases, [CO] increases,  decreases; (e)  decreases, [CO] increases,  increases. In (b), (c), (d), and (e), the mass of carbon will change, but its concentration (activity) will not change.   
44. Only (b)   
46. Add NaCl or some other salt that produces  to the solution. Cooling the solution forces the equilibrium to the right, precipitating more AgCl(s).   
48. Though the solution is saturated, the dynamic nature of the solubility equilibrium means the opposing processes of solid dissolution and precipitation continue to occur (just at equal rates, meaning the dissolved ion concentrations and the amount of undissolved solid remain constant). The radioactive 

ions detected in the solution phase come from dissolution of the added solid, and their presence is countered by precipitation of nonradioactive  .

50.  and    
52.    
54.    
56.    
58.    
60. (a)  (b)    
62. Activities of pure crystalline solids equal 1 and are constant; however, the mass of Ni does change.   
64.    
66.  atm   
68.    
70.  atm   
72. Calculate  based on the calculated concentrations and see if it is equal to  . Because  does equal 4.32

the system must be at equilibrium.

74. (a)  ：  (b) The assumption that  is negligibly small compared to 0.129 is confirmed by comparing the initial concentration of the  to its concentration at equilibrium (they differ by just 1 in the least significant digit’s place).

76. (a)  atm,  atm,  atm; (b) The assumption that  is negligibly small compared to 0.824 is confirmed by comparing the initial concentration of the  to its concentration at equilibrium (0.824 atm versus 0.810 atm, a difference of less than  ).

78.  :  ;  .

79. 

81. 

84. (a)  . (b)  . Added  forms some water as a result of a shift to the left after  is added.

86. (a) (b) [NH3] must increase for Qcto reach Kc. (c) The increase in system volume would lower the partial pressures of all reactants (including  ). (d)  torr

88.  atm and  1

Chapter 14

1. One example for  as a conjugate acid:  as a conjugate base:  ）   
3. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d  (e)  (f )    
5. (  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )    
7. (a)  ; (b)  ,  ; (c)  ,  (d)   (e)  ,  (f )  ，  (g)  ; (h)     
9. The labels are Brønsted-Lowry acid  ; its conjugate base  ; Brønsted-Lowry base  ; its conjugate acid  . (a)  ,  ,  ,  (b)  ,  , HCN(CA),  ; (c)  ,  , HCl(CA),  (d)   ,  (CB),  ; (e)  ,   (CB and CA); (f )  ,  ,  ,  ; (g)  ,  (BB),  ,    
11. Amphiprotic species may either gain or lose a proton in a chemical reaction, thus acting as a base or an acid. An example is  . As an acid:  As a base:    
13. amphiprotic: (a)  (b)

 not amphiprotic: (c)

5. In a neutral solution  . At  ,  .

17.  ;  ; 

19. (a)  ;  ; (b)  ;  ; (c)  ;  ; (d)  ; pH 

23. 

25. 

27. The salt ionizes in solution, but the anion slightly reacts with water to form the weak acid. This reaction also forms  , which causes the solution to be basic.

29. 

31. The oxidation state of the sulfur in  is greater than the oxidation state of the sulfur in  .

 33. BB BA CB CA 35.Ka = 2.3 × 10-11

37. The stronger base or stronger acid is the one with the larger  or  , respectively. In these two examples, they are  and 

39. triethylamine

41. (a)  higher electronegativity of the central ion. (b)  ;  is a base and water is neutral, or decide on the basis of  values. (c) HI;  is weaker than HCl; HCl is weaker than HI. Thus,  is weaker than HI. (d)  ; in binary compounds of hydrogen with nonmetals, the acidity increases for the element lower in a group. (e) HBr; in a period, the acidity increases from left to right; in a group, it increases from top to bottom. Br is to the left and below S, so HBr is the stronger acid.

43. (a)  ; in polyoxy acids, the more electronegative central element—S, in this case—forms the stronger acid. The larger number of oxygen atoms on the central atom (giving it a higher oxidation state) also creates a greater release of hydrogen atoms, resulting in a stronger acid. As a salt, the acidity increases in the same manner. (b)  the basicity of the anions in a series of acids will be the opposite of the acidity in their oxyacids. The acidity increases as the electronegativity of the central atom increases. Cl is more electronegative than Br, and I is the least electronegative of the three. (c)  ; in a series of the same form of oxyacids, the acidity increases as the electronegativity of the central atom increases. Cl is more electronegative than Br, and I is the least electronegative of the three. (d)  ; in a series of oxyacids of the same central element, the acidity increases as the number of oxygen atoms increases (or as the oxidation state of the central atom increases). (e)   and  are anions of weak bases, so they act as strong bases toward  .  and  are anions of weak acids, so they have less basic character. In a periodic group, the more electronegative element has the more basic anion. (f)  with a larger number of oxygen atoms (that is, as the oxidation state of the central ion increases), the corresponding acid becomes more acidic and the anion consequently less basic.

45. 

47. 1. Assume that the change in initial concentration of the acid as the equilibrium is established can be neglected, so this concentration can be assumed constant and equal to the initial value of the total acid concentration. 2. Assume we can neglect the contribution of water to the equilibrium concentration of  .

48. (b) The addition of HCl

50. (a) Adding HCl will add  ions, which will then react with the  ions, lowering their concentration. The equilibrium will shift to the right, increasing the concentration of  , and decreasing the concentration of  ions. (b) Adding  increases the concentration of  and shifts the equilibrium to the left, increasing the concentration of  ions and decreasing the concentration of  ions. (c) Adding NaOH adds  ions, which shifts the equilibrium to the left, increasing the concentration of  ions and decreasing the concentrations of  . (d) Adding NaCl has no effect on the concentrations of the ions. (e) Adding  adds  ions and shifts the equilibrium to the right,

increasing the  and  ion concentrations.

52. This is a case in which the solution contains a mixture of acids of different ionization strengths. In solution, the  exists primarily as  molecules because the ionization of the weak acid is suppressed by the strong acid. Therefore, the  contributes a negligible amount of hydronium ions to the solution. The stronger acid, HCl, is the dominant producer of hydronium ions because it is completely ionized. In such a solution, the stronger acid determines the concentration of hydronium ions, and the ionization of the weaker acid is fixed by the  produced by the stronger acid.

54. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)    
56.    
58. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f )   
60. (a)  Solving for  gives  . This value is less than  of 0.0092, so the assumption that it can be neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:    (b)  Solving for  gives  . This value is less than  of 0.0784, so the assumption that it can be neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are: (  Solving for  gives  . This value is less than  of 0.0810, so the assumption that it can be neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:  Solving for  gives  . This value is less than  of 0.11, so the assumption that it can be neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:  Solving for  gives  . This value is less than  of 0.120, so the assumption that it can be neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:    
62.    
64.      
66. Ka =1.2 × 10-2   
68.    
70. (a) acidic; (b) basic; (c) acidic; (d) neutral   
72.  and  are practically equal 

74. 

76. (a)  ： (b) Kb = 4.3 × 10-12; (c) 

Solving for  gives  . Therefore, compared with  this value is negligible   .

78. Excess  is removed primarily by the reaction:  Excess base is removed by the reaction: 

80. 

82. 

84. (a) The added HCl will increase the concentration of  slightly, which will react with  and produce  in the process. Thus,  decreases and  increases. (b) The added  will increase the concentration of  which will react with  and produce  H in the process. Thus,  decreases slightly and  increases. (c) The added NaCl will have no effect on the concentration of the ions. (d) The added KOH will produce  ions, which will react with the  , thus reducing  . Some additional  will dissociate, producing  ions in the process. Thus,  decreases slightly and  increases. (e) The added  will increase its concentration, causing more of it to dissociate and producing more  and  in the process. Thus,  increases slightly and  increases.

86.    
88.  1   
90. (a)  ; (b) The solution is acidic. (c) 

92. At the equivalence point in the titration of a weak base with a strong acid, the resulting solution is slightly acidic due to the presence of the conjugate acid. Thus, pick an indicator that changes color in the acidic range and brackets the  at the equivalence point. Methyl orange is a good example.

94. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e) 

Chapter 15

1. (a)     5x 3x X

3. There is no change. A solid has an activity of 1 whether there is a little or a lot.

5. The solubility of silver bromide at the new temperature must be known. Normally the solubility increases and some of the solid silver bromide will dissolve.

7.  ,  , and ZnS

11. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d) 

13. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d) 

15. (a)  , [Cl−] = 0.025 M. Check:  an insignificant change;  This value is less than  and can be ignored. (c) 0.2238 M= [Ag+] = 7.4 10–3 M. Check:  the condition is satisfied. (d) [OH–] = 2.8 10–3 M; 5.7 10−12 M= [Zn2+]. Check: xis less than  of  and is, therefore, negligible.

17. (a)  Check:  This value is too large to drop  . Therefore solve by using the quadratic equation:  [Cl–] = 6.1 10–3 (b)  Check:  Therefore, the condition is satisfied.   (c)   Check:  The condition is satisfied; the above value is less than  .  This value is greater than  , so a more exact method, such as successive approximations, must be used.    
19. The changes in concentration are greater than  and thus exceed the maximum value for disregarding the change.   
21.  is the most soluble Ca salt in  , and it is also the most soluble Ca salt in  .   
23.  Since this concentration is higher than  , “gyp” water does not meet the standards.   
25. Mass    
27. (a)     .   
29. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)    
31. (a)  does precipitate. (b) The compound does not precipitate. (c) The compound does not precipitate.

(d) The compound precipitates. 33.  35.  37.  39.  41. (a)  ; (b)  43.  of it is dissolved 45. (a)  and  : Add  (b)  and  : Add  . (c)  and  : Add  . (d)  and  : Add  until  . (e)  and  : Add  (f )  and  : Add  . 47. AgI will precipitate first. 49.  51.  53. (a)  ; (b)  ;  55.  57.   59.  will form first since it has the smallest  value among these homologous compounds and is therefore the least soluble.  will be the last to precipitate since it has the largest K_sp value and is the most soluble.  value. 62. when the amount of solid is so small that a saturated solution is not produced

64. 

66. 5 1023

68.

72. 

74. 

76. (a) . O: / :O=c=o:+ :o-H HIOIC . Acid Base ： ·

(d) NH4+ +C2H5O− -→ C2H5OH+ NH3

80.    
82.  ； 

84. (a)  (b) The electronic and molecular shapes are the same—both tetrahedral. (c) The tetrahedral structure is consistent with  hybridization.

86.    
88. 

90. 

93.  ;  (molar solubility)

95.  ; [Ba2+] = 4.7 10–7 (molar solubility)

97.  (molar solubility)   
99. 7.66

101. (a)  (b)  (c) Determine the concentration of  and  that will be present in the final volume. Compare the value of the ion product  with  . If this value is larger than  , precipitation will occur.     ion produc  This value is smaller than  , so no precipitation will occur. (d)  is less soluble at  than at  . Because added heat acts like an added reagent, when it appears on the product side, the Le Châtelier’s principle states that the equilibrium will shift to the reactants’ side to counter the stress. Consequently, less reagent will dissolve. This situation is found in our case. Therefore, the reaction is exothermic.

103.  ,  , ZnS; each is a salt of a weak acid, and the  from perchloric acid reduces the equilibrium concentration of the anion, thereby increasing the concentration of the cations

105. Effect on amount of solid  ,  ,  : (a) increase, increase, decrease; (b) decrease, increase, decrease; (c) no effect, no effect, no effect; (d) decrease, increase, decrease; (e) increase, no effect, no effect

Chapter 16

1. A reaction has a natural tendency to occur and takes place without the continual input of energy from an external source.

3. (a) spontaneous; (b) nonspontaneous; (c) spontaneous; (d) nonspontaneous; (e) spontaneous; (f) spontaneous

5. Although the oxidation of plastics is spontaneous, the rate of oxidation is very slow. Plastics are therefore kinetically stable and do not decompose appreciably even over relatively long periods of time.

7. There are four initial microstates and four final microstates.

9. The probability for all the particles to be on one side is  This probability is noticeably lower than the  result for the four-particle system. The conclusion we can make is that the probability for all the particles to stay in only one part of the system will decrease rapidly as the number of particles increases, and, for instance, the probability for all molecules of gas to gather in only one side of a room at room temperature and pressure is negligible since the number of gas molecules in the room is very large.

11. There is only one initial state. For the final state, the energy can be contained in pairs A-C, A-D, B-C, or B-D. Thus, there are four final possible states.

13. The masses of these molecules would suggest the opposite trend in their entropies. The observed trend is a result of the more significant variation of entropy with a physical state. At room temperature,  is a solid,  is a liquid, and  is a gas.

15. (a)  as it is a larger molecule (more complex and more massive), and so more microstates describing its motions are available at any given temperature. (b)  as it is in the gaseous state. (c)  , since entropy is an extensive property, and so two  atoms (or two moles of  atoms) possess twice as much entropy as one atom (or one mole of atoms).

17. (a) Negative. The relatively ordered solid precipitating decreases the number of mobile ions in solution. (b) Negative. There is a net loss of three moles of gas from reactants to products. (c) Positive. There is a ne increase of seven moles of gas from reactants to products.

19.  There are 7.5 moles of gas initially, and  moles of gas in the end. Therefore, it is likely that the entropy increases as a result of this reaction, and  is positive.

21. (a) 107 J/K; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f ) −171.9 J/K; (g) −7.2 J/K   
23.    
25. (a)    
27. As  at each of these temperatures, melting is not spontaneous at either of them. The given values for entropy and enthalpy are for NaCl at 298 K. It is assumed that these do not change significantly at the higher temperatures used in the problem.   
29. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f ) 290.0 J/K   
31. The reaction is nonspontaneous at room temperature. Above  ,  will become negative, and the reaction will become spontaneous.   
33. (a)  nonspontaneous; (b)  spontaneous; (c)  spontaneous; (d)  spontaneous; (e)  spontaneous; (f)  spontaneous   
35. (a) The standard free energy of formation is  . (b) The calculation agrees with the value in Appendix G because free energy is a state function (just like the enthalpy and entropy), so its change depends only on the initial and final states, not the path between them.   
37. (a) The reaction is nonspontaneous; (b) Above  the process is spontaneous.   
39. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )    
41. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)    
43. In each of the following, the value of  is not given at the temperature of the reaction. Therefore, we must calculate  from the values  and  and then calculate  from the relation  . (a)   ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)    
45. The standard free energy change is  ln  When reactants and products are in their standard states (1 bar or 1 atm),  . As the reaction proceeds toward equilibrium, the reaction shifts left (the amount of products drops while the amount of reactants increases):  , and  becomes less positive as it approaches zero. At equilibrium,  and  .   
47. The reaction will be spontaneous at temperatures greater than  .   
49.  ; The process is exothermic.   
51.  atm. This is the maximum pressure of the gases under the stated conditions.   
53.    
55.    
56. (a)  ; (b)    
58.    
60. (a) Under standard thermodynamic conditions, the evaporation is nonspontaneous; (b)  ; (c) The evaporation of water is spontaneous; (d)  must always be less than  or less than 0.031 atm. 0.031 atm represents air saturated with water vapor at  , or  humidity.   
62. (a) Nonspontaneous as  (b)   The forward reaction to produce F6P is spontaneous under these conditions.   
64.  is negative as the process is spontaneous.  is positive as with the solution becoming cold, the dissolving must be endothermic.  must be positive as this drives the process, and it is expected for the dissolution of any soluble ionic compound.   
66. (a) Increasing the oxygen partial pressure will yield a decrease in  and  thus becomes more negative. (b) Increasing the oxygen partial pressure will yield a decrease in  and  thus becomes more negative. (c) Increasing the oxygen partial pressure will yield an increase in  and  thus becomes more positive.   
Chapter 17

1. (a) reduction; (b) oxidation; (c) oxidation; (d) reduction   
3. (a)  (b  (c)  (d) 

5. Oxidized: (a)  ; (b)  (c) Al; reduced: (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  oxidizing agent: (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  reducing agent: (a)  ; (b)  (c) Al

7. Oxidized  reducing agent: (a)  (b)  ; (c)  ; (d) Al; reduced  oxidizing agent: (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  (d) 

9. In basic solution,  . Hydrogen ion cannot appear as a reactant because its concentration is essentially zero. If it were produced, it would instantly react with the excess hydroxide ion to produce water. Thus, hydrogen ion should notappear as a reactant or product in basic solution.

11. (a)   (c) Mn

5. Species oxidized  reducing agent: (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; and (d)  ; Species reduced  oxidizing agent: (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; and (d) 

17. Without the salt bridge, the circuit would be open (or broken) and no current could flow. With a salt bridge, each half-cell remains electrically neutral and current can flow through the circuit.

19. Active electrodes participate in the oxidation-reduction reaction. Since metals form cations, the electrode would lose mass if metal atoms in the electrode were to oxidize and go into solution. Oxidation occurs at the anode.

21. (a)  (spontaneous); (b)  (spontaneous); (c)  (spontaneous); (  (spontaneous)

23.  ）；  ; spontaneous

25.  −1.259 V; nonspontaneous

27. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c) 

29. (a) standard cell potential:  , spontaneous; cell potential under stated conditions:  , spontaneous; (b) standard cell potential:  , spontaneous; cell potential under stated conditions:  spontaneous; (c) standard cell potential:  , nonspontaneous; cell potential under stated conditions:  , nonspontaneous

31. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d) 

33. (a)  cathode M

34. Batteries are self-contained and have a limited supply of reagents to expend before going dead. Alternatively, battery reaction byproducts accumulate and interfere with the reaction. Because a fuel cell is constantly resupplied with reactants and products are expelled, it can continue to function as long as reagents are supplied.

36.  as described in the Nernst equation, has a term that is directly proportional to temperature. At low temperatures, this term is decreased, resulting in a lower cell voltage provided by the battery to the device—the same effect as a battery running dead.

38. Mg and Zn

40. Both examples involve cathodic protection. The (sacrificial) anode is the metal that corrodes (oxidizes or reacts). In the case of iron (−0.447 V) and zinc  , zinc has a more negative standard reduction potential and so serves as the anode. In the case of iron and copper  , iron has the smaller standard reduction potential and so corrodes (serves as the anode).

42. While the reduction potential of lithium would make it capable of protecting the other metals, this high potential is also indicative of how reactive lithium is; it would have a spontaneous reaction with most substances. This means that the lithium would react quickly with other substances, even those that would not oxidize the metal it is attempting to protect. Reactivity like this means the sacrificial anode would be depleted rapidly and need to be replaced frequently. (Optional additional reason: fire hazard in the presence of water.)

46. (a) (b)  (c)  (d)   mass  mass  mass  mass 

Chapter 18

1. The alkali metals all have a single  electron in their outermost shell. In contrast, the alkaline earth metals have a completed  subshell in their outermost shell. In general, the alkali metals react faster and are more reactive than the corresponding alkaline earth metals in the same period.

3.

   Sr +I →SrI2     

5. The possible ways of distinguishing between the two include infrared spectroscopy by comparison of known compounds, a flame test that gives the characteristic yellow color for sodium (strontium has a red flame), or comparison of their solubilities in water. At  , NaCl dissolves to the extent of  compared with for SrCl2. Heating to 100 °C provides an easy test, since the solubility of NaCl is but that of SrCl2 i s Density determination on a solid is sometimes difficult, but there is enough difference  NaCl and  ) that this method would be viable and perhaps the easiest and least expensive test to perform.

7. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e) 

9. 11 lb

11. Yes, tin reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce hydrogen gas.

13. In  , the bonding is ionic, as indicated by its melting point of  . In  , the bonding is covalent, as evidenced by it being an unstable liquid at room temperature.

countercurrent fractionating 15. 

17. Cathode (reduction):  Anode (oxidation):  Overall reaction: 

19. 

21. Despite its reactivity, magnesium can be used in construction even when the magnesium is going to come in contact with a flame because a protective oxide coating is formed, preventing gross oxidation. Only if the metal is finely subdivided or present in a thin sheet will a high-intensity flame cause its rapid burning.

23. Extract from ore:  Recover:  Sinter:  Dissolve in  and electrolyze:    
25.    
27.    
29. (a)  :

31.  .

33. (a)  :  bonding about Si; the structure is tetrahedral; (b)  bonding about Si; the structure is tetrahedral; (c)  :  bonding about each Si; the structure is linear along the Si-Si bond; (d)  :  bonding about Si; the structure is tetrahedral; (e)  bonding about Si; the structure is octahedral   
35. (a) nonpolar; (b) nonpolar; (c) polar; (d) nonpolar; (e) polar   
37. (a) tellurium dioxide or tellurium(IV) oxide; (b) antimony(III) sulfide; (c) germanium(IV) fluoride; (d) silane or silicon(IV) hydride; (e) germanium(IV) hydride   
39. Boron has only  and  orbitals available, which can accommodate a maximum of four electron pairs. Unlike silicon, no  orbitals are available in boron.   
41. (a)  ;  ; (b)  ;  ; (c)  ;    
43. A mild solution of hydrofluoric acid would dissolve the silicate and would not harm the diamond.   
45. In the  molecule, the nitrogen atoms have an  bond and two π bonds holding the two atoms together. The presence of three strong bonds makes  a very stable molecule. Phosphorus is a third-period element, and as such, does not form π bonds efficiently; therefore, it must fulfill its bonding requirement by forming three σ bonds.

47. (a)  ,  , and  ; (b)  and  ; (c)  and 

49. 

51. The electronegativity of the nonmetals is greater than that of hydrogen. Thus, the negative charge is better represented on the nonmetal, which has the greater tendency to attract electrons in the bond to itself.

53. Hydrogen has only one orbital with which to bond to other atoms. Consequently, only one two-electron bond can form.

55. 

57. (a)   (c) 

59. (a)  : 

(b)  :

(c)  [:: :N一H T LH

(d)  ::-N-"::F:：

61. Ammonia acts as a Brønsted base because it readily accepts protons and as a Lewis base in that it has an electron pair to donate. Brønsted base:  Lewis base: 

63. (a)  :

Nitrogen is  hybridized. The molecule has a bent geometry with an ONO bond angle of approximately  .

(b) 

Nitrogen is  hybridized. The molecule has a bent geometry with an ONO bond angle slightly less than

 .  
(c)  0= 一： ：

Nitrogen is sphybridized. The molecule has a linear geometry with an ONO bond angle of  .

65. Nitrogen cannot form a  molecule because it does not have  orbitals to bond with the additional two fluorine atoms.

67. (a)

(b)

(e)

69. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  or  (e)  or  (f ) 

71. 291 mL

73. 28 tons

75. (a)

(b)

77. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )    
79. 

81. (a)   (c) ZnCO3(s) + 2CH3COOH(aq) -→ Zn(CH3COO)(aq)+ CO2(g)+HO(l); (d) 

85. (a)  ; (b)Cs2CO3(s)+2HF(aq) -→ 2CsF(aq) + CO2(g)+HO(l); (c)  (d) N  (e) 

87.  is the stronger acid because, in a series of oxyacids with similar formulas, the higher the electronegativity of the central atom, the stronger is the attraction of the central atom for the electrons of the oxygen(s). The stronger attraction of the oxygen electron results in a stronger attraction of oxygen for the electrons in the O-H bond, making the hydrogen more easily released. The weaker this bond, the stronger the acid.

89. As  and  are both oxyacids and their central atoms both have the same oxidation number, the acid strength depends on the relative electronegativity of the central atom. As sulfur is more electronegative than selenium,  is the stronger acid.

91.  ,  ;  ,  ,  ;  ,  , 

93.  :  ;  :  ; KHS: 

95. Sulfur is able to form double bonds only at high temperatures (substantially endothermic conditions), which is not the case for oxygen.

97. There are many possible answers including:  and 

99. 

101.  is not a salt because it is covalently bonded. A salt must have ionic bonds.

103. In oxyacids with similar formulas, the acid strength increases as the electronegativity of the central atom increases.  is stronger than  ; Cl is more electronegative than Br.

105. (a)

107. (a) bromine trifluoride; (b) sodium bromate; (c) phosphorus pentabromide; (d) sodium perchlorate; (e)   
potassium hypochlorite   
109. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c) Cl:  ; (d) I:  ; Cl:  ; (e) F: 0   
111. (a)  hybridized; (b)  hybridized; (c)  hybridized; (d)  hybridized; (e)  hybridized;   
113. (a) nonpolar; (b) nonpolar; (c) polar; (d) nonpolar; (e) polar

115. The empirical formula is  , and the balanced reactions are:

Chapter 19

1. (a) Sc:  ; (b) Ti:  ; (c) Cr:  ; (d) Fe:  ; (e) Ru:    
3. (a) La:  ,  : [Xe]; (b) Sm:  ,  :  ; (c) Lu:  ,  :    
5. Al is used because it is the strongest reducing agent and the only option listed that can provide sufficient driving force to convert La(III) into La.   
7. Mo   
9. The  slag is less dense than the molten iron, so it can easily be separated. Also, the floating slag layer creates a barrier that prevents the molten iron from exposure to  , which would oxidize the Fe back to  .   
11.    
13.    
15.  ,  is negative so this reduction is not spontaneous.    
17. (a)  (b)   (c)  (d)  ; (e)Mn2O3(s)+6H3O+(aq)+6Cl-(aq) -→ 2MnCl3(s)+9HO(l); (f )    
19. (a)  SO4²-(aq); (  n acid solution between pH 2 and pH 6,  forms  which is in equilibrium with dichromate ion. The reaction is  At other acidic pHs, the reaction is  (d)    
21. (a)  Fe(s   
4Fe² FeC (s)

23. As  is added,  As more  is added,  

25. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)  ; (d)  ; (e)  ; (f )  and  ; (g)  and  ; (h)  ; (i)  27. (a) 4,  ; (b) 6,  ; (c) 2,  ; (d) 4,  ; (e) 6  ; (f ) 6,  ; (g) 6, [Co(en)2Br2]NO3

29. (a)  :

(b) [Pt(NH3)(py)(Cl)(Br)]:

(c) [Zn(NH3)3Cl]+ :

(d) [Pt(NH3)3Cl]+ :

(f )  :

31. (a) tricarbonatocobaltate(III) ion; (b) tetraaminecopper(II) ion; (c) tetraaminedibromocobalt(III) sulfate; (d) tetraamineplatinum(II) tetrachloroplatinate(II); (e) tris-(ethylenediamine)chromium(III) nitrate; (f) diaminedibromopalladium(II); (g) potassium pentachlorocuprate(II); (h) diaminedichlorozinc(II)   
33. (a) none; (b) none; (c) The two Cl ligands can be cisor trans. When they are cis, there will also be an optical isomer.

35.

37.

Low spin, diamagnetic,  High spin, paramagnetic, 

39.  with three unpaired electrons.   
41. (a) 4; (b) 2; (c) 1; (d) 5; (e) 0   
43. (a)  ; (b)  ; (c)    
45. The complex does not have any unpaired electrons. The complex does not have any geometric isomers,   
but the mirror image is nonsuperimposable, so it has an optical isomer.   
47. No.  has a complete  sublevel.

Chapter 20

1. There are several sets of answers; one is: (a) 

(b) 

(c) 

3. Both reactions result in bromine being incorporated into the structure of the product. The difference is the way in which that incorporation takes place. In the saturated hydrocarbon, an existing C–H bond is broken, and a bond between the C and the Br can then be formed. In the unsaturated hydrocarbon, the only bond broken in the hydrocarbon is the π bond whose electrons can be used to form a bond to one of the bromine atoms in  (the electrons from the Br–Br bond form the other C–Br bond on the other carbon that was part of the π bond in the starting unsaturated hydrocarbon).

5. Unbranched alkanes have free rotation about the C–C bonds, yielding all orientations of the substituents about these bonds equivalent, interchangeable by rotation. In the unbranched alkenes, the inability to rotate about the  bond results in fixed (unchanging) substituent orientations, thus permitting different isomers. Since these concepts pertain to phenomena at the molecular level, this explanation involves the microscopic domain.

7. They are the same compound because each is a saturated hydrocarbon containing an unbranched chain of six carbon atoms.

9. (a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f ) 

11. (a) 2,2-dibromobutane; (b) 2-chloro-2-methylpropane; (c) 2-methylbutane; (d) 1-butyne; (e) 4-fluoro-4-methyl-1-octyne; (f) trans-1-chloropropene; (g) 4-methyl-1-pentene

17. (a) 2,2,4-trimethylpentane; (b) 2,2,3-trimethylpentane, 2,3,4-trimethylpentane, and 2,3,3-trimethylpentane:

19.

21. In the following, the carbon backbone and the appropriate number of hydrogen atoms are shown in condensed form:

23.

HIC=C-H

In acetylene, the bonding uses  hybrids on carbon atoms and  orbitals on hydrogen atoms. In benzene, the carbon atoms are  hybridized.

27. 

29. 

31. (a) ethyl alcohol, ethanol:  ; (b) methyl alcohol, methanol:  ; (c) ethylene glycol, ethanediol:  ; (d) isopropyl alcohol, 2-propanol:  ; (e) glycerine, l,2,3-trihydroxypropane: 

33. (a) 1-ethoxybutane, butyl ethyl ether; (b) 1-ethoxypropane, ethyl propyl ether; (c) 1-methoxypropane, methyl propyl ether

35.  , two alcohol groups;  , ether and alcohol groups   
37. (a)

(b) 

39. (a) 

41. (a)

43. A ketone contains a group bonded to two additional carbon atoms; thus, a minimum of three carbon atoms are needed.

45. Since they are both carboxylic acids, they each contain the –COOH functional group and its characteristics. The difference is the hydrocarbon chain in a saturated fatty acid contains no double or triple bonds, whereas the hydrocarbon chain in an unsaturated fatty acid contains one or more multiple bonds.   
47. (a)  : all carbons are tetrahedral; (b)  the end carbons are tetrahedral and the central carbon is trigonal planar; (c)  : all are tetrahedral; (d)  : the methyl carbon is tetrahedral and the acid carbon is trigonal planar; (e)  : all are tetrahedral except the right-most two carbons, which are trigonal planar

49.

51.(a)CH3CH2CH2CH2OH+CHC(O)OH —→ CH3C(O)OCHCH2CH2CH3 +H2O:H 工 工 H H :O: H :O: H H H H H1 一 一 1 _= ！! 1 1 1·H-C C C C- O-H + HIC-C- O一H H- -C- -C O- -C C C C- -H +H-O:__ 1 i 1 1 1 1 .H H H H H H H H H H

(b) 2CH3CH2COOH+ CaCO3 -→ (CH3CH2COO)Ca +CO2 +H2O:

53.

55. Trimethyl amine: trigonal pyramidal,  ; trimethyl ammonium ion: tetrahedral,    
57.

pyridine, trigonal planar,  (nonlinear or bent)

pyridinium ion, trigonal planar,  (trigonal planar)

61.  ;    
63. The carbon in  , initially at  , changes hybridization to  in  .

Chapter 21

1. (a) sodium-24; (b) aluminum-29; (c) krypton-73; (d) iridium-194   
3. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)    
5. (a)  (b)  (c) (d) 7. Nuclear reactions usually change one type of nucleus into another; chemical changes rearrange atoms. Nuclear reactions involve much larger energies than chemical reactions and have measureable mass changes. 9. (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e)   
11. (a) A nucleon is any particle contained in the nucleus of the atom, so it can refer to protons and neutrons. (b) An  particle is one product of natural radioactivity and is the nucleus of a helium atom. (c) A  particle is a product of natural radioactivity and is a high-speed electron. (d) A positron is a particle with the same mass as an electron but with a positive charge. (e) Gamma rays compose electromagnetic radiation of high energy and short wavelength. (f) Nuclide is a term used when referring to a single type of nucleus. (g) The mass number is the sum of the number of protons and the number of neutrons in an element. (h) The atomic number is the number of protons in the nucleus of an element.

15. 

17. (a)  per atom; (b) 7.808 MeV/nucleon

19.  (helium nuclei),  (electrons),  (positrons), and  (neutrons) may be emitted from a radioactive element, all of which are particles;  rays also may be emitted.

21. (a) conversion of a neutron to a proton:  (b) conversion of a proton to a neutron; the positron has the same mass as an electron and the same magnitude of positive charge as the electron has negative charge; when the n:p ratio of a nucleus is too low, a proton is converted into a neutron with the emission of a positron: (c) In a proton-rich nucleus, an inner atomic electron can be absorbed. In simplest form, this changes a proton into a neutron: 

23. The electron pulled into the nucleus was most likely found in the 1sorbital. As an electron falls from a higher energy level to replace it, the difference in the energy of the replacement electron in its two energy levels is given off as an X-ray.

25. Manganese-51 is most likely to decay by positron emission. The n:p ratio for  is  ; for  , it is  ; for Fe-59, it is  . Positron decay occurs when the n:p ratio is low. Mn-51 has the lowest n:p ratio and therefore is most likely to decay by positron emission. Besides,  is a stable isotope, and  decays by beta emission.

27. (a)  decay; (b)  decay; (c) positron emission; (d)  decay; (e)  decay

29.   

31. Half-life is the time required for half the atoms in a sample to decay. Example (answers may vary): For C-14, the half-life is 5770 years. A 10-g sample of C-14 would contain  of C-14 after 5770 years; a  sample of C-14 would contain  after 5770 years.

33.  or 

35. 

37. 0.12 h–1

39. (a) 3.8 billion years; (b) The rock would be younger than the age calculated in part (a). If Sr was originally in the rock, the amount produced by radioactive decay would equal the present amount minus the initial amount. As this amount would be smaller than the amount used to calculate the age of the rock and the age is proportional to the amount of Sr, the rock would be younger.

41.  ; This shows that no Pu-239 could remain since the formation of the earth. Consequently, the plutonium now present could not have been formed with the uranium.

43. 

49. Two nuclei must collide for fusion to occur. High temperatures are required to give the nuclei enough kinetic energy to overcome the very strong repulsion resulting from their positive charges.

51. A nuclear reactor consists of the following:

1. A nuclear fuel. A fissionable isotope must be present in large enough quantities to sustain a controlled chain reaction. The radioactive isotope is contained in tubes called fuel rods.   
2. A moderator. A moderator slows neutrons produced by nuclear reactions so that they can be absorbed by the fuel and cause additional nuclear reactions.   
3. A coolant. The coolant carries heat from the fission reaction to an external boiler and turbine where it is transformed into electricity.   
4. A control system. The control system consists of control rods placed between fuel rods to absorb neutrons and is used to adjust the number of neutrons and keep the rate of the chain reaction at a safe

level.

5. A shield and containment system. The function of this component is to protect workers from radiation produced by the nuclear reactions and to withstand the high pressures resulting from hightemperature reactions.

53. The fission of uranium generates heat, which is carried to an external steam generator (boiler). The resulting steam turns a turbine that powers an electrical generator.

55. Introduction of either radioactive  or radioactive  into the solution containing the stated reaction, with subsequent time given for equilibration, will produce a radioactive precipitate that was originally devoid of radiation.

57. (a)  (b) 37.6 days

59. Alpha particles can be stopped by very thin shielding but have much stronger ionizing potential than beta particles, X-rays, and  -rays. When inhaled, there is no protective skin covering the cells of the lungs, making it possible to damage the DNA in those cells and cause cancer.

61. (a)  ; (b)  Ci

Symbols

Δoct 963   
 antibonding molecular   
orbital 396   
σsmolecularorbital 395   
 molecular orbital 396

A

absolute zero 427   
accuracy 40   
acid 169   
acid anhydrides 879   
acid ionization 694   
acid-base indicators 734   
acid-base reaction 169   
acid-ionizationconstant,Ka   
703   
acidic 697   
acids 96   
actinide series 936   
actinides 87   
actinoid series 936   
activated complex 626   
activationenergy(Ea) 626   
active electrodes 823   
activity 582   
actual yield 188   
addition reaction 991   
adhesive forces 490   
Alcohols 995   
aldehydes 999   
alkali metals 87   
Alkaline batteries 835   
alkaline earth metals 87, 861   
Alkanes 978   
alkenes 988   
alkyl group 984   
alkynes 992   
Allotropes 866   
alloys 548   
Alpha (α) decay 1032   
Alpha particles 1029   
alpha particles (α particles) 6   
Amides 1008   
Amines 1005   
Amontons’s law 426   
amorphous 872   
amorphous solids 510   
amphiphilic 587   
amphiprotic 695   
amphoteric 695   
amplitude 259   
analyte 191   
anion 72   
anode 821   
antibonding orbitals 396   
antimatter 1029   
aqueous solution 137   
aromatic hydrocarbons 993   
Arrhenius 694   
Arrhenius equation 627   
atmosphere (atm) 417   
atom 19, 62   
atomic mass 77   
atomic mass unit (amu) 71   
atomic number (Z) 72   
atomic orbital 280   
Atwater system 232   
Aufbau principle 288   
autoionization 695   
Autumn 481   
average rate 601   
Avogadro’s law 433   
Avogadro’snumber(NA) 121   
axial position 347

B

balanced 161   
Balmer 269   
band of stability 1025   
bar 417   
barometer 418   
Bartlett 920   
base 171   
base anhydrides 904   
Base ionization 694   
base-ionizationconstant(Kb)   
704   
basic 697   
battery 834   
becquerel (Bq) 1063   
Beta (β) decay 1032   
Beta particles 1029   
bicarbonate anion 891   
Bidentate ligands 950   
bimolecular reaction 631   
binary acid 102   
binary compounds 96   
binding energy per nucleon   
1027   
biofuel 239   
Bismuth 866   
blackbody 264   
body-centered cubic (BCC)   
solid 519   
body-centered cubic unit cell   
519   
Bohr 269, 270   
Bohr’s model 270   
boiling point 495   
boiling point elevation 571   
boiling point elevation constant   
571   
Boltzmann 788   
bomb calorimeter 230   
bond angle 343   
bond dipole moment 354   
bond distance 343   
bond length 317   
bond order 400   
bonding orbitals 396   
Borates 875   
Born 279   
Born-Haber cycle 341   
Boyle 694   
Boyle’s law 431   
Bragg 530   
Bragg equation 530   
Brønsted-Lowry acid 694   
Brønsted-Lowry base 694   
buffer 724   
buffer capacity 727

buret 191

C   
calories (cal) 216   
calorimeter 221   
calorimetry 221   
capillary action 490   
carbonates 891   
carbonyl group 999   
carboxylic acids 1003   
Carnot 787   
catalysts 607   
cathode 821   
cathode ray 66   
cathodic protection 842   
cations 72   
cell notations 822   
cell potentials, Ecell 824   
cell schematics 822   
Celsius  30   
central metal 949   
Chadwick 70, 1030   
chain reaction 1046   
chalcogens 87   
Charles’s law 428   
chelate 950   
chelating ligands 950   
chemical change 24   
chemical equation 160   
chemical property 24   
chemical reduction 869   
chemical symbol 73   
chemical thermodynamics 233   
chemistry 11   
chemotherapy 1057   
chlor-alkali process 904   
cisconfiguration 955   
Clausius 787   
Clausius-Clapeyron equation   
496   
coefficients 160   
cohesive forces 488   
colligative properties 564   
Collision theory 625   
colloidal dispersions 583   
colloids 583   
color change interval 735   
combustion analysis 195   
combustion reactions 177   
C011 ion 165   
compounds 16   
compressibility factor (Z) 459   
concentrated 137   
concentration 137   
concentration cell 833   
condensation 493   
containment system 1051   
continuous spectrum 264   
control rods 1050   
coordinate covalent bond 763   
coordination compounds 938,   
949   
coordination isomers 957   
coordination number 517, 949   
coordination sphere 949   
core electrons 291   
Corrosion 840   
Cottrell 589   
covalent bonds 92, 317   
Covalent network solids 512   
covalent radius 296   
crenation 578   
Crick 532   
critical mass 1047   
critical point 508   
Cronin 82   
crystal field splitting 963   
crystal field theory 962   
crystalline solids 510   
cubic centimeter (cm3) 31   
cubic closest packing (CCP) 520   
cubic meter (m3) 31   
Curie 1030   
curie (Ci) 1063

D

dorbitals 280   
 -blockelements 935   
Dalton 19   
Dalton (Da) 71   
Dalton’s atomic theory 62   
Dalton’s law of partial   
pressures 440   
daughter nuclide 1031   
Davisson 276   
Davy 694   
de Broglie 275   
Debye 582   
degenerate orbitals 283, 397   
density 31   
deposition 499   
diamagnetic 394   
Diffraction 530   
diffusion 449   
dilute 137   
Dilution 141   
dimensional analysis 42   
dipole moment 354   
dipole-dipole attraction 482   
Diprotic acids 722   
diprotic base 724   
dispersed phase 585   
dispersion force 478   
dispersion medium 585   
disproportionation reactions   
879   
dissociation 554   
dis ociationconstant(Kd) 765   
dissolved 137   
donor atom 949   
double bond 325   
Downs cell 867   
dry cell 835   
dynamic equilibrium 493

E

efectivenuclearcharge,Zef   
298   
effusion 450   
egorbitals 963   
electrode potential (EX) 825   
electrolysis 843   
electrolytes 552   
electromagnetic radiation 258   
electromagnetic spectrum 259   
electron 67   
electron affinity 302   
Electron capture 1033   
electron configuration 288   
electron volts (eV) 1024   
electron-pair geometry 345   
electronegativity 319   
electroplating 846   
element 62   
elementary reaction 630   
elements 16   
empirical formula 81   
empirical formula mass 135   
emulsifying agent 586   
emulsion 586   
enantiomers 956   
end point 191   
endothermic process 215   
Energy 213   
enthalpy(H) 234   
enthalpychange(ΔH) 234   
entropy(S) 787   
equatorial position 347   
equilibrium 658   
equilibriumconstant,K 663   
equivalence point 191   
esters 1003   
Ethers 996   
exact number 34   
excess reactant 186   
excited electronic state 271   
exothermic process 215   
expansion work 233   
extensive property 25   
external beam radiation   
therapy 1056

F

forbitals 281   
f-blockelements 935   
face-centered cubic (FCC) solid   
520   
face-centered cubic unit cell   
519   
factor-label method 42   
Fahrenheit 45   
first law of thermodynamics   
233   
first transition series 936   
fissile 1047   
fission 1044   
fissionable 1047   
formal charge 332   
formationconstant(Kf) 765   
formula mass 118   
fourth transition series 936   
Franklin 532   
Frasch process 913   
fre energychange(ΔG) 797   
free radicals 330   
freezing 499   
freezing point 499   
freezing point depression 573   
freezing point depression   
constant 573   
frequency 259   
frequency factor 627   
fuel cell 839   
Fuller 313, 881   
functional group 988   
fundamental unit of charge (e)   
71   
fusion 1053   
fusion reactor 1054

G

galvanic cells 821   
galvanization 842   
Gamma emission (γ emission)   
1032   
gamma rays (γ) 1029   
gas 14   
Gay-Lussac’s law 426   
Geiger 69   
Geiger counter 1062   
Geim 514, 882   
gel 590   
Germer 276   
Gibbs 797   
Gib sfre energy(G) 797   
Gouy 394   
Graham’s law of effusion 450   
gravimetric analysis 193   
gray (Gy) 1063   
Greaney 481   
ground electronic state 271   
groups 85

H

Haber process 888   
half-cells 821   
half-life 1035   
half-lifeofareaction(t1/2) 622   
half-reaction 174   
halides 917   
Hall 868   
Hall–Héroult cell 868   
halogens 87   
Hasselbalch 729   
Heat(q) 215   
heatcapacity(C) 216   
Heisenberg uncertainty   
principle 278   
hemolysis 578   
Henderson 729   
Henderson-Hasselbalch   
equation 729   
Henry’s law 557, 559   
Héroult 868   
hertz (Hz) 259   
Hess’s law 242, 245   
heterogeneous catalyst 639   
heterogeneous equilibrium 667   
heterogeneous mixture 17   
hexagonal closest packing   
(HCP) 521   
high-spin complexes 964   
holes 525   
homogeneous catalyst 636   
homogeneous equilibrium 665   
homogeneous mixture 17   
homonuclear diatomic   
molecules 395   
Hu 481   
Hückel 582   
Hund’s rule 290   
Huygens 258   
hybrid orbitals 380   
hybridization 380   
hydrates 98   
hydrocarbons 237   
hydrogen bonding 483   
hydrogen carbonates 891   
hydrogen halides 890   
hydrogen sulfates 907   
hydrogen sulfites 907   
hydrogenation 887   
hydrometallurgy 943   
hydrostatic pressure 419   
hydroxides 901   
hypertonic 578   
hypervalent molecules 331   
hypothesis 11   
hypotonic 578

I

ideal gas 433   
ideal gas constant 433   
ideal gas law 433   
ideal solution 549   
immiscible 561   
indicators 191   
induced dipole 478   
inert electrode 823   
inert gases 87   
inert pair effect 315   
initial rate 601   
inner transition metals 87   
insoluble 166   
instantaneous dipole 478   
instantaneous rate 601   
integrated rate laws 614   
intensive property 25   
interference patterns 262   
interhalogens 919   
intermediates 630   
intermolecular forces 476   
internalenergy(U) 233   
internal radiation therapy   
(brachytherapy) 1056   
International System of Units   
28   
interstitial sites 515   
ion 72   
ion-dipole attraction 553   
ion-productconstantforwater,   
Kw 695   
ionic bonds 92, 314   
ionic compound 93   
Ionic solids 511   
ionization energy 299   
Ionization isomers 957   
ionizing radiation 1060   
isoelectronic 299   
isomers 83   
isomorphous 520   
isotonic 578   
isotopes 70   
IUPAC 30, 983

J joule (J) 216

K

kelvin (K) 30   
ketones 999   
kilogram (kg) 30   
kinetic energy 213   
kinetic molecular theory 454   
Kohn 398   
L   
lanthanide series 936   
lanthanides 87   
lanthanoid series 936   
laticeenergy(ΔHlatice) 340   
Lavoisier 437   
law of conservation of matter   
15   
law of constant composition 64   
law of definite proportions 64   
law of mass action 663   
law of multiple proportions 64   
laws 12   
Le Châtelier’s principle 669   
lead acid battery 838   
length 29   
Lewis 763   
Lewis acid 764   
Lewis acid-base adduct 764   
Lewis acid-base chemistry 764   
Lewis base 764   
Lewis structures 324   
Lewis symbol 323   
ligands 765, 949   
limiting reactant 186   
line spectra 268   
linear 344   
linear combination of atomic   
orbitals (LCAO) 395   
Linkage isomers 956   
liquid 14   
liter (L) 31   
Lithium ion batteries 837   
London 478   
London dispersion force 478   
lone pairs 324   
low-spin complexes 964

M

macroscopic domain 12   
magic numbers 1026   
magnetic quantum number   
282   
main-group elements 87   
manometer 420   
Marsden 69   
mass defect 1023   
mass number (A) 72   
mass percentage 144   
mass-energy equivalence   
equation 1023   
mass-volume percent 146   
Matter 14   
Maxwell 258   
mean free path 449   
melting 498   
melting point 499   
Mendeleev 85   
Metallic solids 511   
metalloid 858   
metalloids 86   
metals 86, 858   
meter (m) 29   
method of initial rates 609   
Meyer 85   
microscopic domain 12   
microstate 788   
millicurie (mCi) 1063   
Millikan 67   
milliliter (mL) 31   
miscible 560   
mixture 17   
Molality 565   
molar mass 121   
Molarity(M) 137   
mole 121   
molefraction(X) 441   
molecular compounds 95   
molecular equation 164   
molecular formula 79   
molecular mass 81   
molecularorbital  395   
molecular orbital diagram 399   
Molecular orbital theory 395   
Molecular solids 512   
molecular structure 334, 345   
molecularity 631   
molecule 20   
Molina 637   
monatomic ions 91   
monodentate 949   
monoprotic acids 721   
ms 283

N

Nagaoka 68   
Nernst equation 832   
net ionic equation 165   
neutral 697   
neutralization reaction 172   
neutrons 70   
Newton 258   
Nickel-cadmium 836   
Nitrates 908   
nitrogen fixation 893   
noble gases 87   
node 378   
nodes 263   
Nomenclature 96   
nonelectrolytes 552   
nonionizing radiation 1060   
nonmetals 86   
nonspontaneous process 784   
normal boiling point 495   
Novoselov 514, 882   
nuclear binding energy 1023   
Nuclear chemistry 1022   
Nuclear fuel 1049   
nuclear moderator 1049   
nuclear reactions 1028   
nuclear reactor 1048   
Nuclear transmutation 1042   
nucleons 1022   
nucleus 69   
nuclide 1022   
nutritional calorie (Calorie) 23

O

octahedral 344   
octahedral hole 525   
octet rule 324   
optical isomers 956   
Orbital diagrams 289   
organic compounds 978   
osmosis 576   
osmoticpre sure(Π) 576   
Ostwald process 907   
overall reaction order 608   
overlap 376   
oxidation 174   
oxidation number 175   
oxidation state 175   
Oxidation-reduction (redox)   
reactions 176   
oxides 901   
oxidizing agent (oxidant) 175   
oxyacids 103, 715   
Oxyanions 91   
ozone 900   
P   
porbitals 280   
pairing energy (P) 964   
paramagnetism 393   
parent nuclide 1031   
partial pressure 440   
partially miscible 562   
particle accelerators 1042   
parts per billion (ppb) 147   
parts per million (ppm) 147   
pascal (Pa) 417   
passivation 859   
Pauli exclusion principle 284   
Pauling 320   
percent composition 129   
percent ionization 703   
percent yield 188   
periodic law 85   
periodic table 85   
periods 85   
peroxides 901   
Perrier 1031   
pH 697   
phase diagram 503   
photons 266   
photosynthesis 900   
physical change 23   
physical property 23   
pi (π) bonding molecular   
orbital 396   
pi bond (π bond) 378   
Pidgeon process 870   
plasma 14   
platinum metals 938   
pnictogens 87   
pOH 697   
polar covalent bond 319   
polar molecule 354   
polarizability 479   
polyatomic ions 91   
polydentate ligand 950   
polymorphs 876   
Positron emission  decay   
1033   
Positrons 1029   
potential energy 213   
pounds per square inch (psi)   
417   
precipitate 166   
precipitation reaction 166   
precision 40   
pressure 416   
primary cells 835   
principal quantum number   
279   
products 160   
proton 70   
pure covalent bond 318   
pure substance 16

Q

quantitative analysis 190   
quantization 263   
quantum mechanics 279   
quantum numbers 274

R

radiation absorbed dose (rad)   
1063   
Radiation dosimeters 1062   
Radiation therapy 1056   
radioactive decay 1031   
radioactive decay series 1034   
radioactive label 1055   
radioactive tracer 1055   
radioactivity 1026   
radiocarbon dating 1038   
radioisotope 1026   
radiometric dating 1037   
Raoult’s law 568   
rare earth elements 937   
rate constant 608   
rate equations 607   
rate expression 600   
Rate laws 607   
rate of diffusion 450   
rate of reaction 600   
rate-limiting step 632   
RBE 1063   
reactants 160   
reaction diagrams 627   
reaction mechanism 630   
reaction orders 608   
reactionquotient(Q) 660   
reactor coolant 1050   
reducing agent (reductant) 175   
reduction 175   
relative biological effectiveness   
1063   
representative elements 87,   
858   
representative metals 858   
resonance 335   
resonance forms 335   
resonance hybrid 335   
reversible process 787   
Reversible reactions 658   
roentgen equivalent for man   
(rem) 1063   
root mean square speed 456   
rounding 36   
Rutherford 69, 270, 1030   
Rydberg 269

S

sorbitals 280   
s-p mixing 402   
sacrificial anodes 842   
salt 172   
salt bridge 821   
saturated 555   
saturated hydrocarbons 978   
scientific method 12   
scintillation counter 1062   
second (s) 31   
second law of thermodynamics   
793   
second transition series 936   
secondary (angular momentum)   
quantum number 280   
secondary cells 835   
Segre 1031   
selective precipitation 759   
semipermeable membranes   
576   
series 85   
shells 279   
SI Units 28   
sievert (Sv) 1063   
sigma bonds (σ bonds) 378   
significant digits 35   
significant figures 35   
Silicates 877   
simple cubic structure 517   
simple cubic unit cell 517   
single bond 324   
Single-displacement   
(replacement) reactions 177   
skeletal structure 979   
Smalley 329, 881   
smelting 940   
Soddy 70   
solid 14   
Solomon 448   
solubility 166, 555   
soluble 166   
solute 137   
solution 17   
solvation 550   
solvent 137   
sphybridorbitals 381   
sp2hybridorbitals 382   
sp3hybridorbitals 384   
sp3dhybridorbitals 386   
sp3d2hybridorbitals 386   
space lattice 528   
spatial isomers 84   
specificheatcapacity(c) 216   
spectator ions 165   
spectrochemical series 963   
spin quantum number 283   
spontaneous process 549, 784   
standard cell potential,    
824   
standard electrode potential,   
 825   
Standard enthalpy of   
combustion 237   
standard enthalpy of formation   
ΔHf°ΔHf° 240   
Standardentropies  795   
standardentropychange    
795   
standardfre energychanges,   
 798   
standardfre energyof   
formationΔGf° 799   
standard hydrogen electrode   
(SHE) 824   
standard molar volume 43   
standard state 237   
standard temperature and   
pressure (STP) 436   
Standing waves 263   
state function 234   
stationary waves 263   
Steel 942   
stepwise ionization 722   
stoichiometric factors 181   
stoichiometry 181   
strong acids 170   
strong bases 171   
strong electrolyte 552   
strong nuclear force 1023   
strong-field ligands 964   
structural formula 80   
structural isomers 83   
subcritical mass 1047   
sublimation 499   
subshell 280   
substituents 983   
substitution reaction 987   
sulfates 907   
sulfites 907   
superconductor 947   
supercritical fluid 508   
supercritical mass 1047   
superoxides 901   
supersaturated 555   
Surface tension 489   
surroundings 221   
suspensions 583   
symbolic domain 13   
system 221

T

t2gorbitals 963   
temperature 45, 213   
termolecular reaction 632   
tetrahedral 344   
tetrahedral hole 525   
theoretical yield 188   
theories 12   
Thermal energy 213   
thermochemistry 212   
third law of thermodynamics   
795   
third transition series 936   
Thomson 66   
titrant 191   
titration analysis 191   
titration curve 730   
torr 419   
transconfiguration 955   
transition metals 87   
transition state 626   
transmutation 1042   
transuranium elements 1044   
trigonal bipyramidal 344   
trigonal planar 344   
triple bond 325   
triple point 506   
triprotic acid 724   
Tyndall effect 584

U

uncertainty 34   
unified atomic mass unit (u) 71   
unimolecular reaction 631   
unit cell 516   
unit conversion factor 42   
Units 28   
unsaturated 555   
urms 456

V

Vacancies 515   
Valence bond theory 376   
valence electrons 291   
valence shell 294   
Valence shell electron-pair   
repulsion theory (VSEPR   
theory) 343   
van der Waals equation 460   
van der Waals forces 478   
van’tHof factor(i) 581   
vapor pressure 493   
vapor pressure of water 443   
vaporization 493   
vector 354   
viscosity 487   
voltaic cells 821   
Volume 31   
volume percentage 146

W

Watson 532   
wave 258   
wave-particle duality 266   
wavefunctions 279   
wavelength 259   
weak acids 170   
weak bases 171   
weak electrolyte 552   
weak-field ligands 964   
Weight 15   
Wilkins 532   
Wohler 977   
work(w) 213

X-ray crystallography 530

Y

Young 258